 The relationship between deprivation-triggered brain plasticity and adaptive behaviour following visual loss has been a focus of much research and debate (Merabet and Pascual-Leone, 2010; Baseler et al., 2011; Espinosa and Stryker, 2012). In the sensorimotor system, a link between brain plasticity following amputation and compensatory behaviour has only recently been established (Makin et al., 2013a; Philip and Frey, 2014). In people who were born without a hand, or who lost it in childhood, research on related behavioural changes has focused on compensatory foot usage (which is uncommon relative to arm usage), with conflicting results (Yu et al., 2006; Stoeckel et al., 2009). We recently showed using task-evoked fMRI that the way individuals use their bodies to compensate for their disability when missing a hand (either at birth or later in life due to injury) is reflected in the way the cortical territory of the missing hand is recruited during limb movements (Makin et al., 2013a). Specifically, individuals born with one hand (i.e., congenital unilateral upper limb absence; hereafter termed: ‘one handers’) showed both higher usage of the handless arm (i.e., residual arm) in daily tasks and increased activation in the cortical territory of the missing hand when moving that arm. In contrast, amputees that lost a hand later in life tended to use their remaining hand (i.e., intact hand) more frequently and also showed greater activation in the territory of the missing hand when moving the intact hand. These results provide evidence that whichever body part is being over-used to compensate for the absence of a hand also gains increased representation in the cortical territory of the missing hand. The corticospinal tracts mediate a range of descending pathways from cortical motor areas to the spinal cord, as well as ascending tracts to somatosensory cortex. To study structural alterations in motor-related pathways of one-handers, asymmetry in white matter microstructure of the bilateral corticospinal tracts was investigated. Fractional anisotropy (FA), an index commonly derived from diffusion MRI, was used as a probe of tissue microstructure. This measurement is thought to reflect myelination and fibre density, but is also influenced by other micro-features (e.g., membrane permeability, tissue geometry, see ‘Discussion’) (Zatorre et al., 2012; Jones et al., 2013; Sampaio-Baptista et al., 2013). One-handers showed increased asymmetry in white matter microstructure (reflected by decreased white matter FA in the corticospinal tract contralateral to the missing hand relative to the ipsilateral tract) compared to controls (p = 0.003, randomisation test, Figure 1A). The effect peaked at the posterior limb of the internal capsule (peak z coordinate = 88, p = 0.02 corrected, Figure 1B), an area that contains sensory thalamic fibres, but was also distributed across extensive regions of the tract (Figure 1C). No significant group differences were found for control tracts that are not directly associated with the sensorimotor system (Inferior fronto-occipital fasciculus: p = 0.28, Inferior longitudinal fasciculus: p = 0.27, randomisation tests).10.7554/eLife.04605.002Figure 1.Increased structural asymmetry in one-handers.(A) White matter values (mean fractional anisotropy plus-minus s.e.m.) were extracted from the bilateral corticospinal tracts of each participant, and laterality indices were computed to determine the level of white matter asymmetry across hemispheres ([(intact − residual)/(intact + residual)] for one-handers, and [(dominant − nondominant)/(dominant + nondominant)] for controls). Laterality indices were significantly higher in one-handers compared to controls. (B) To spatially identify regions of increased white-matter laterality, laterality indices were computed for each slice along the superior–inferior axis of the corticospinal tracts, and a group comparison was conducted using permutation-based cluster statistics. Regions showing significant group differences along the corticospinal tracts were centred around the posterior limb of the internal capsule, reflecting higher laterality in one-handers compared to controls. Results are presented on the left corticospinal tract from a posterior view. (C) Right: Regions that show significantly higher laterality values in one-handers are presented on the left corticospinal tract (highlighted in green) along with their spatial locations along the z axis, as marked by arrows. Left: The lateralisation profile of white matter microstructure along the corticospinal tract is represented by p-values, derived from the comparison between one-handers and controls. Higher values indicate stronger statistical differences. The red line marks the significance threshold, corrected for multiple comparisons. 1H, one-handers; CTR, controls; asterisks denote significance at the level of **p < 0.01.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.04605.002 Here we report alterations in structural and functional brain symmetry of the sensorimotor network in a large sample of individuals born without a hand compared to controls. We find reduced symmetry of white matter microstructure in the corticospinal tracts of one-handers, as well as reduced symmetry of resting-state functional connectivity patterns between the sensorimotor hand regions (i.e., reduced inter-hemispheric connectivity). Importantly, although we detected asymmetrical structural and functional patterns across the group of one-handers, we were also able to observe more symmetrical functional connectivity patterns in some individuals. Specifically, those one-handers who utilising their residual arm for typically bimanual tasks showed normal (i.e., symmetrical) levels of resting-state inter-hemispheric connectivity. Due to the cross-sectional nature of this study, we are unable to determine the origin of the increased functional connectivity observed in those who used their residual arm more frequently. This observation may reflect preservation of initially intact inter-regional connections, which are otherwise lost through lack of use, or may instead reflect establishment of (otherwise missing) functional connections through usage. The fact that individuals with increased functional connectivity didn't also show greater structural symmetry may support the latter interpretation of functional reorganisation. Either way, our findings suggest that compensatory behaviour is a powerful driver in shaping brain organisation associated with sensorimotor deprivation, as reflected in resting-state functional connectivity. Our unique dataset also provides a rare opportunity to demonstrate how individualised ecological behaviour is imprinted in spontaneous brain connectivity patterns, as was previously hypothesised (Harmelech and Malach, 2013). This study relied largely on the same population recruited for a previous study, using the same scanning procedures and exclusion criteria as described before (Makin et al., 2013a). Data from one control participant were discarded from the resting states fMRI analysese due to excessive head movements (>3 mm), and data from a different control participant were discarded from diffusion MRI analyses due to problems during data collection. Additionally, three one-handers and three control participants were recruited, resulting in a total of 14 one-handers (age = 36.64 plus-minus 12.02, four with absent right hand, see Table 1 for demographic details) and 24 controls (age = 41.12 plus-minus 12.86, eight left hand dominant). Recruitment was carried through the Oxford Centre for Enablement and Opcare in accordance with NHS national research ethics service approval (10/H0707/29), and written informed consent was obtained.
Previously we showed, using task-evoked fMRI, that compensatory intact hand usage after amputation facilitates remapping of limb representations in the cortical territory of the missing hand (Makin et al., 2013a). Here we show that compensatory arm usage in individuals born without a hand (one-handers) reflects functional connectivity of spontaneous brain activity in the cortical hand region. Compared with two-handed controls, one-handers showed reduced symmetry of hand region inter-hemispheric resting-state functional connectivity and corticospinal white matter microstructure. Nevertheless, those one-handers who more frequently use their residual (handless) arm for typically bimanual daily tasks also showed more symmetrical functional connectivity of the hand region, demonstrating that adaptive behaviour drives long-range brain organisation. We therefore suggest that compensatory arm usage maintains symmetrical sensorimotor functional connectivity in one-handers. Since variability in spontaneous functional connectivity in our study reflects ecological behaviour, we propose that inter-hemispheric symmetry, typically observed in resting sensorimotor networks, depends on coordinated motor behaviour in daily life.