 Where does our internal representation of space come from? And how does it code for space extending in three dimensions? New findings about space-related activity in the bat have recently raised this question again (Ulanovsky and Moss, 2011; Yartsev et al., 2011; Yartsev and Ulanovsky, 2013; Finkelstein et al., 2014). The similarity in the place cell and, most remarkably, in the grid cell representation between rodents and bats suggests a common neural substrate for spatial navigation, shared across these mammals (Andersen and Buneo, 2002; Jacobs et al., 2010; Sereno and Lehky, 2011; Killian et al., 2012; Indovina et al., 2013; Jacobs et al., 2013; Thurley et al., 2014), and it provides an indication possibly valid also for other animals living and moving extensively in three dimensions, like for example dolphins, monkeys and even non-mammalian species (Healy et al., 2005; Dacke and Srinivasan, 2007; Wu and Dickman, 2012; Burt de Perera and Holbrook, 2012). At the same time, the obvious difference in the behavior of these species requires a system that flexibly adapts to perform computations as different as mapping two- or three-dimensional space (Knierim et al., 2000; Hayman et al., 2011; Taube and Shinder, 2013). Here we describe a model of grid cell formation that accounts for both these aspects of spatial cognition, in a unitary perspective on the mEC network (Figure 1).Figure 1.Scheme of the simulations.(A) We simulate the trajectory of a bat exploring a volume of space over a prolonged period of time. At each step, the bat moves forward at a constant speed and chooses a new direction of movement close to the previous one. (B) The feed-forward network (equivalent to that shown in [Kropff and Treves, 2008]), including here only two mEC neurons. The would-be grid units receive inputs from place cell-like units with firing fields similar to those reported in Yartsev and Ulanovsky (2013). (C) Snapshots of the evolution of the firing rate map of a single unit. The figures correspond to (from left to right) 2, 5, 10 and 20 million time steps of learning.© 2013, M Yartsev, N Ulanovsky.2013M Yartsev, N UlanovskyFigure 1 is reproduced from M Yartsev, N Ulanovsky. 2013. Representation of three-dimensional space in the hippocampus of flying bats. Science 340:367-372. Reprinted with permission from AAAS. In our simulations a virtual bat explores a volume of side L with a constant speed v. The position of the animal is sampled at time steps of constant Δt. We temporarily leave these quantities unspecified. We will discuss their actual values at the end of the paper as they are critical for the interpretation of the results. For the moment they should be understood as expressed in arbitrary units. The path the animal performs is generated as a correlated random walk in which the direction of movement at any time step depends on the previous one. For simplicity, the change in running direction between two consecutive steps of the virtual bat is sampled from a Gaussian distribution with zero mean and standard deviation σh = 0.15 radians. In our simulations the activity of mEC units is progressively shaped over an extended period of time. Starting from an initial random arrangement of connections and a correspondingly heterogeneous distribution of activity, the combined effect of adaptation and synaptic learning leads the units to approach, after a transient reorganization of their firing fields in space, a stable configuration that is the outcome of the self-organization process. Looking at the firing configurations developed by the units in our simulations, one can notice a similarity with the theoretical solutions maximizing the packing density of spheres described above. In Figure 4 we show two typical examples from the units emerging in the model mEC layer in two distinct simulations, each taken after about 15 million time steps of learning time. On the top row the firing rates of the units presents a blobby appearance, with equally sized, spherical fields homogeneously distributed in the volume. Although rate maps resemble those we expect from a regular tiling of the three-dimensional environment, they are not very informative about the overall organization of the fields nor about any symmetry in their spatial distribution. Computing the corresponding autocorrelograms we indeed find that the two units are rather different in this respect, as they express two distinct field configurations. One is in fact presenting an approximately FCC arrangement (Figure 4, left), while the other is close to an HCP one (Figure 4, right). Overlaying the axes of symmetry of the two ideal arrangements (green and orange lines) illustrates the differences between the two.10.7554/eLife.05913.004Figure 4.Two illustrative examples of unit activity obtained from simulations.Left: Face centered cubic (FCC)-like unit. Right: Hexagonal close packed (HCP)-like unit. Top: Rate maps. Bottom: Autocorrelograms. We plot the central portion of the autocorrelogram comprising the peaks surrounding the origin. Red and blue contours correspond to a correlation value of 0.2 and 0.25, respectively.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.05913.004 How are these results relevant to predict the grid configuration expressed in 3D, and that can be tested in a flying bat? Our model points towards a hierarchy of timescales, associated with the emergence of periodical spatial activity of increasing complexity. To establish a relation between our results and a real bat, it is necessary to specify the actual values of the temporal and spatial parameters of our model, to obtain a time scale for the development of the grids that we can then compare with experimental findings. The triangular tile is the minimal structure associated with regular volume tessellations. The two properties defining any regular triangle are the length of the side and the internal angle. Therefore, to characterize the local structure of the grid pattern in an individual unit we extract these two properties from the spikes it produces. Firstly, from our three-dimensional rate maps we generate a representative number of spike pairs through a Poisson process to construct the distribution of distances. Typically, this distribution is highly multi-peaked, where the first peak corresponds to distances between intra-field spikes, the second peak between spikes belonging to neighboring fields, and subsequent peaks between spikes in non-adjacent fields. Since the length of the side of the tiling triangle in a regular pattern would correspond to the location of the second peak, we define a range of distances around this peak as a filter condition to declare spikes belonging to neighboring fields. The limits of this range were defined by the surrounding troughs, if they exist, or fixed to 0.5 d and 1.4 d, if they do not, where d is the distance corresponding to the second peak, declared as the grid distance of the unit. As a control condition, we generate a distribution of pseudo-spikes from reshuffling spike-cell combinations and randomly reassigning spikes to different units, thus removing the field structure of the activity of each cell. Therefore, distances between pseudo-spikes are unimodally distributed. Secondly, triplets of spikes were putatively classified as belonging to neighboring fields based on distance filtering in the previous range, and the three internal angles determined. These three angles were pooled together and accumulated in an overall angular distribution. The distribution of angles so obtained for the spiking activity and the control condition were different and their ratio was used to characterize the angle subtended in the triangular pattern. Typically (in the asymptotical state), this ratio was unimodal and distributed asymmetrically around a peak. We defined the characteristic angle as the median of the above-chance distribution (ratio values above unity indicate an above-chance condition or, in other words, angles more frequently obtained than randomly) and the significance of the angle as the maximum of the ratio distribution.
Do we expect periodic grid cells to emerge in bats, or perhaps dolphins, exploring a three-dimensional environment? How long will it take? Our self-organizing model, based on ring-rate adaptation, points at a complex answer. The mathematical analysis leads to asymptotic states resembling face centered cubic (FCC) and hexagonal close packed (HCP) crystal structures, which are calculated to be very close to each other in terms of cost function. The simulation of the full model, however, shows that the approach to such asymptotic states involves several sub-processes over distinct time scales. The smoothing of the initially irregular multiple fields of individual units and their arrangement into hexagonal grids over certain best planes are observed to occur relatively quickly, even in large 3D volumes. The correct mutual orientation of the planes, though, and the coordinated arrangement of different units, take a longer time, with the network showing no sign of convergence towards either a pure FCC or HCP ordering.
Our ability to navigate through our environment depends on a region of the brain called the hippocampus. In the 1990s it was shown that this structure, which takes its name from the Greek word for ‘seahorse’ owing to its shape, was larger in London taxi drivers than it was in the general population. However, as early as the 1960s, experiments in rats had revealed that specific cells within the hippocampus—called place cells—fire whenever an animal is in a particular location, and thus enable the animal to build up a map of its environment.