 Everyday activities depend on the reliability of neural computation. Yet the mechanistic building blocks of the underlying circuits can exhibit highly stochastic behavior. Understanding neural computation requires bringing these two perspectives together, in particular, it requires identifying, under physiological conditions, the sources of noise in neural signals and how such noise is controlled (Deneve et al., 2001; Averbeck et al., 2006). Sensory systems, for example, must encode and transmit physiological stimuli accurately and quickly based on inherently stochastic processes such as transduction and synaptic transmission. Our aims were (1) to determine the degree of synchronization of RBC output synapses, (2) to identify the factors that control synchronization, and (3) to measure the impact of synchronization on the transmission of signal and noise through the rod bipolar circuit. By exploiting the characteristic connectivity between RBCs and two downstream targets, we investigated how cross-synaptic synchrony influences the transmission of physiological inputs through the retina. We found that synchrony across different RBC output synapses was very strong in the dark, such that ∼80% of the vesicle release events occurring at different ribbons within the same RBC axon terminal were synchronous. The high level of cross-synaptic synchrony caused noise in the synaptic inputs to AII amacrine cells to be dominated by noise generated in the rod photoreceptors rather than noise generated at the RBC output synapse itself. As light level increased, conditions under which other retinal circuits become active (Manookin et al., 2008), vesicle release at the RBC→AII synapse transitioned from high CSS to low CSS, thus limiting transmission of upstream signals and noise. We discuss these conclusions and their implications for retinal and neural processing in more detail below. Experiments were conducted on whole mount and slice (200 μm thick) preparations taken from dark-adapted Gjd2 knockout (Deans et al., 2001, 2002) or wild-type C57/BL6 mice. Retinas were isolated under infrared visualization and stored in oxygenated (95% O2/5% CO2) Ames medium (Sigma, St. Louis, MO) at ∼32°C to 34°C. Once under the microscope, tissue preparations were perfused by the same Ames solution at a rate of ∼8 ml/min. Isolated retinas were either flattened onto polyL-lysine slides (whole mount) or embedded in agarose and sliced as previously described (Dunn et al., 2006; Murphy and Rieke, 2006). Retinal neurons were visualized and targeted for whole-cell recordings using video DIC with an infrared light source (>950 nm). Data in Figures 1-3,5,6 and Figure 5—figure supplement 1 were collected from retinal slices, whereas data in Figures 4,7 and Figure 4—figure supplement 1 were collected from whole mount preparations. To ensure that retinal recordings consistently reflected a dark-adapted state, only one recording (single cell or paired) came from each dark-adapted retina preparation (i.e., slice or whole-mount).
Cross-synaptic synchrony—correlations in transmitter release across output synapses of a single neuron—is a key determinant of how signal and noise traverse neural circuits. The anatomical connectivity between rod bipolar and A17 amacrine cells in the mammalian retina, specifically that neighboring A17s often receive input from many of the same rod bipolar cells, provides a rare technical opportunity to measure cross-synaptic synchrony under physiological conditions. This approach reveals that synchronization of rod bipolar cell synapses is near perfect in the dark and decreases with increasing light level. Strong synaptic synchronization in the dark minimizes intrinsic synaptic noise and allows rod bipolar cells to faithfully transmit upstream signal and noise to downstream neurons. Desynchronization in steady light lowers the sensitivity of the rod bipolar output to upstream voltage fluctuations. This work reveals how cross-synaptic synchrony shapes retinal responses to physiological light inputs and, more generally, signaling in complex neural networks.
The human eye is capable of detecting a single photon of starlight. This level of sensitivity is made possible by the high sensitivity of photoreceptors called rods. There are around 120 million rods in the retina, and they support vision in levels of light that are too low to activate the photoreceptors called cones that allow us to see in color. This is why we cannot see colors in the dark.