 Changes in temperature considerably modulate physico-chemical processes and, consequently, also affect neural processing (Schmidt-Nielsen, 1997; Robertson and Money, 2012). The dependence of neural activity on temperature poses a particular challenge for animals without central heat regulation, like insects, who are permanently exposed to temperature fluctuations. These animals must have evolved intrinsic mechanisms at the behavioral, systems, or cellular level that help to circumvent temperature-induced behavioral modulations. Such compensatory mechanisms, however, may also come into play for homeothermic animals under pathological conditions, like fever or hypothermia in mammals. Based on recordings of auditory receptor neurons in the metathoracic ganglion of the grasshopper Locusta migratoria, we quantified the dependence of the firing rate on temperature. Figure 1A shows voltage responses to stimulation at three different sound intensities and two different temperatures, as well as spike shapes. Interestingly, spike rates at a given sound intensity did not differ much between the low and high temperatures and mildly increased from low to high temperature, while spike width decreased. In general, firing rates of grasshopper receptor neurons are relatively high, saturating only at several hundreds of Hz. At a given temperature, the transfer function, that is the firing rate as a function of sound intensity, has a sigmoidal shape (Figure 1B). Three parameters (saturation rate, half-max sound level, and dynamic-range width) are sufficient to capture the experimental transfer functions (R2 >0.95 for all response curves). Comparing transfer functions at the two different temperatures revealed that their temperature dependence was surprisingly low (Figure 1C): all corresponding median Q10 values were below 1.5; the sound intensity at half-maximal response (half-max sound level) remained almost unchanged, as did the median of the slope at half-max sound level. The width of action potentials, in contrast, was lower at the higher temperature.10.7554/eLife.02078.003Figure 1.Cooling mildly affected electrophysiologically recorded firing rates generated by auditory receptor neurons in response to sound.(A) Voltage traces at 29 and 21°C for one neuron (red and blue lines, respectively). Black horizontal lines mark time intervals of stimulus presentation; stimulus intensity as indicated. (B) Firing-rate as a function of sound intensity was well described by sigmoidal functions at both temperatures (same neuron as in A). The three sigmoidal parameters (saturation rate, sound level at half-maximum, and dynamic-range width) were extracted from fits to the experimental data. (C) Statistics of the measured temperature dependence, Q10(x)=(x(T+ΔT)x(T))10/ΔT, were computed for several quantities x. For a population of nine receptor neurons all three parameters of the sigmoidal function, as well as the spike rate and slope at the cold half-maximum were temperature compensated (median Q10∈[1,1.5], see also Figure 1—figure supplement 2 and Figure 1—figure supplement 3).DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.02078.00310.7554/eLife.02078.004Figure 1—figure supplement 1.Temperature calibration curve.Time course of temperature changes during the cooling-down procedure at the Peltier element (blue) and the tissue close to the tympanal membrane, where auditory receptor neurons attach (red); recordings from four animals. These curves were used as reference to estimate the temperature change during electrophysiological recordings.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.02078.00410.7554/eLife.02078.005Figure 1—figure supplement 2.Sound-intensity resolved p-values of statistical differences between firing rates at the two temperatures.Stimuli at each sound intensity were presented five times (before and after the temperature change). It was tested whether the corresponding firing rates at the two temperatures belong to an identical distribution with equal medians (ranksum test; p-values < 0.05 indicate a significant effect of temperature on firing rate). The figure illustrates the distribution of the test's p-values across all neurons at different levels of sound intensity (the symbol + indicates an outlier). The effect of temperature on firing rate was most significant for high sound intensities. Presumably, a higher relative variability in firing rate obscured the effect of temperature at lower firing rates (i.e., at lower sound intensities).DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.02078.00510.7554/eLife.02078.006Figure 1—figure supplement 3.Statistical analysis of Q10 values.Statistical significance of observables shown in Figure 1C. Based on a Wilcoxon signed rank test the null hypotheses that the median of a distribution was 1, 1.5, or 2 were tested. For values of p<0.05 Q10 medians were statistically different (from 1, 1.5, or 2.0, respectively). Spike rates both at half-max and at saturation were significantly affected by temperature changes (Q10>1,p=0.001), but not significantly different from 1.5 (p≥0.4), indicating temperature compensation. Q10 values of saturation spike rates, in particular, were also significantly lower than 2.0. The median temperature dependencies of half-max sound level and slope at half-max were not significantly different from 1, indicating temperature invariance. Dynamic-range width and action-potential width significantly increased with cooling (medianQ10<1,p<0.01).DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.02078.006 We studied the temperature sensitivity of the firing rate in individual neurons of the grasshopper auditory periphery and found responses to auditory stimulation to be surprisingly temperature compensated. Based on biophysically-motivated neuron models, we identified mechanisms that account for the experimentally observed cell-intrinsic temperature compensation. Our theoretical analysis suggests that spike generation itself can be relatively temperature insensitive, even though the conductances involved are affected by temperature changes. Importantly, mechanisms increasing the robustness to temperature changes need not compromise the energy efficiency of action-potential generation nor the resting cost. In general, the capacity to transmit rate-based information of sound intensity moderately increased with temperature due to the increase in steepness of the f-I curve. We also predict optimal temperature dependencies of the tympanum-mediated transduction process from sound to receptor current that contribute to temperature compensation. On a side note, we introduced a computationally efficient way to optimize visualization of model-derived observables in a high-dimensional parameter space in the context of dimensional stacking (LeBlanc et al., 1990; Taylor et al., 2006). Experiments were performed on adult L. migratoria, obtained from a commercial supplier and held at room temperature (22-25°C). Intracellular recordings from auditory neurons within the metathoracic ganglion were conventionally conducted as described elsewhere (Franz and Ronacher, 2002; Wohlgemuth and Ronacher, 2007), using glass microelectrodes filled with a 3-5% solution of Lucifer yellow in 0.5 M LiCl. Neuronal responses were amplified (BRAMP-01; npi electronic GmbH, Tamm, Germany) and recorded by a data-acquisition board (BNC-2090A; National Instruments, Austin, TX) with 20 kHz sampling rate. To control for temperature, the preparation was placed directly on a Peltier element connected to a 2 V battery and a potentiometer. Temperature was monitored and recorded with a digital thermometer (GMH 3210, Greisinger electronic GmbH, Regenstauf, Germany) connected to a NiCr-Ni-thermoelement (GTF 300, Type K, Greisinger electronic GmbH, Regenstauf, Germany). For each experiment, recordings were conducted first at a fixed higher tissue temperature (in the range of 28-29°C), then the preparation was cooled down to a lower temperature (in the range of 21-23°) and recordings were repeated.
Changes in temperature affect biochemical reaction rates and, consequently, neural processing. The nervous systems of poikilothermic animals must have evolved mechanisms enabling them to retain their functionality under varying temperatures. Auditory receptor neurons of grasshoppers respond to sound in a surprisingly temperature-compensated manner: firing rates depend moderately on temperature, with average Q10 values around 1.5. Analysis of conductance-based neuron models reveals that temperature compensation of spike generation can be achieved solely relying on cell-intrinsic processes and despite a strong dependence of ion conductances on temperature. Remarkably, this type of temperature compensation need not come at an additional metabolic cost of spike generation. Firing rate-based information transfer is likely to increase with temperature and we derive predictions for an optimal temperature dependence of the tympanal transduction process fostering temperature compensation. The example of auditory receptor neurons demonstrates how neurons may exploit single-cell mechanisms to cope with multiple constraints in parallel.
Warm-blooded animals—including mammals and birds—expend large amounts of energy in keeping their body temperature constant regardless of how hot or cold their environment is. By contrast, the body temperature of cold-blooded animals—including amphibians, reptiles, and insects—follows that of their surroundings. Cold-blooded animals must therefore have evolved a means to cope with the effects of changes in temperature, but exactly how they do this is not clear.