 Circadian (∼24 hr) rhythms of behavior and physiology are regulated by a distributed system of cell-autonomous circadian oscillators located in the brain and in most peripheral organs and tissues (Bell-Pedersen et al., 2005; Mohawk et al., 2012). In mammals, a population of coupled circadian clock cells in the hypothalamic suprachiasmatic nuclei (SCN) function as a master pacemaker responsible for coordinating circadian oscillators elsewhere in the brain and other tissues with daily light-dark cycles (Welsh et al., 2010). Circadian clocks in many tissues, including multiple brain regions outside of the SCN, can also be entrained by daily cycles of food availability, independently of the SCN pacemaker (Stokkan et al., 2001; Mistlberger, 2011; Verwey and Amir, 2011; Mohawk et al., 2012). In rat and mouse, this is readily demonstrated by restricting food access to the middle of the light period, when nocturnal rodents normally eat little and are inactive. This induces a marked shifting of circadian oscillators and organ functions to align with the new daily feeding time, while the SCN remains coupled to the light-dark (LD) cycle. In many species, this is also associated with the emergence of a daily bout of locomotor activity that anticipates meal time by 1-3 hr (Boulos and Terman, 1980; Stephan, 2002; Mistlberger, 2011). Remarkably, this so-called food anticipatory activity (FAA) exhibits formal properties of circadian clock control, yet persists robustly after removal of the SCN (Stephan et al., 1979; Boulos and Terman, 1980; Marchant and Mistlberger, 1997). Anticipatory rhythms can also be induced by scheduled daily access to water, salt, palatable foods, an opportunity to mate, and psychostimulant drugs (Mistlberger and Rusak, 1987; Mistlberger, 1994; Kosobud et al., 1998; Iijima et al., 2002; Mendoza et al., 2005; Honma and Honma, 2009; Webb et al., 2009; Hsu et al., 2010a, 2010b; Gallardo et al., 2012; Jansen et al., 2012; Landry et al., 2012; Mohawk et al., 2013). The ability of animals to coordinate activity and physiology with access to critical resources is obviously adaptive. Similar circadian processes in humans could create daily windows of vulnerability to drug seeking, overeating, and other addictive behaviors. To determine the significance of the dopamine system in mediating FAA, we tested mice lacking either dopamine D1 receptors (D1R KO mice) or dopamine D2R receptors (D2R KO mice). First, we investigated whether mice lacking D2R (Kelly et al., 1997) showed impairments in FAA. We measured the baseline home-cage behavior using automated video-based behavior analysis (Steele et al., 2007) of D2R KO mice and wild-type (WT) littermates in their home-cage environment. Prior to any dietary intervention (‘day -7’), both groups of mice demonstrated normal nocturnal activity waveforms with no significant differences in any 1-hr bin and no increase in activity in the hours before Zeitgeber Time (ZT) 8 (on a 13:11 LD cycle, ZT 12 is lights-off by convention) (Figure 1A). Next, we tested their ability to time a daily 60% CR meal fed at ZT 8 every day for 28 days, recording their behavior weekly. Data were normalized by dividing the amount of high activity behavior in each hour by the total seconds of activity over the 24 hr video recording to express a fraction of high activity per hour. Measurements taken at 14, 21, and 28 days of CR revealed that both WT and D2R KO mice had a large increase in high activity (hanging, jumping, walking, and rearing) behaviors during the 3 hr preceding feeding time (Figure 1B-D). In both D2R KO and WT mice fed 60% CR daily, we observed similar acquisition and maintenance of FAA defined as normalized high activity in the 3 hr before feeding (ZT 5-8) (Figure 1E). As expected, mice of either genotype with ad libitum (AL) access to food showed very little high activity behavior in the hours preceding scheduled feeding when they were given an additional food pellet as a control for handling and disturbance (Figure 1F). These results suggest that D2R is not necessary for mediating FAA on a 60% CR meal.10.7554/eLife.03781.003Figure 1.Activity of D2R KO mice and WT mice on 60% CR.(A) The fraction of all recorded frames within each 1-hr bin on day -7 when the mice were walking, hanging, jumping, or rearing. All mice were still on an ad libitum diet. (B, C, D) The fraction of high activity frames for D2R WT (n = 12) and KO (n = 8) mice in each 1-hr bin on days 14, 21, and 28 of CR. Arrows indicate the bin in which the calorie restricted meal was delivered (ZT 8). Shaded boxes represent lights-off and yellow boxes indicated lights on. (E) The fraction of high activity in the 3 hr before feeding time (ZT 5-8) on days -7, 0, 7, 14, 21, and 28 of the study for mice on CR diets. (F) The fraction of high activity in the 3 hr before feeding time (ZT 5-8) for mice on ad libitum diets. There were no significant differences (Mann-Whitney) in fraction of high activity between D2R WT and KO mice. Median data are plotted with error bars indicating interquartile ranges.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.03781.003 In rodents, behavioral anticipation of a regularly scheduled feeding time is mediated by circadian oscillators entrainable by feeding. Localization of these oscillators and their entrainment pathways has been an enduring challenge (Davidson, 2009; Mistlberger, 2011). Recent studies suggest a role for dopamine signaling in the expression and timing of food anticipatory rhythms in mice and rats (Liu et al., 2012; Smit et al., 2013). In this study, we provide comprehensive evidence supporting an important role for dopamine signaling via D1R in the expression of FAA in CR mice fed in the light period. Using video-based automated behavior analysis, motion sensors, and running discs, we demonstrated that anticipation of a daily meal is markedly attenuated in mice lacking D1R. By contrast, it is normal in mice lacking D2R and in dopamine-deficient mice with local production of dopamine in the dorsal striatum. The reduction in FAA in D1R KO mice is evident both in total counts and when normalized for total daily activity. We propose that attenuated FAA in D1R KO mice may involve three distinct processes; circadian oscillator entrainment, incentive motivation, and metabolic homeostasis. These experiments were approved by the institutional animal care committees of California Institute of Technology (protocol number 1567); Keck Science Department of Claremont McKenna College, Pitzer College, Scripps Colleges; California State Polytechnic University, Pomona (13.029), University of Washington, Seattle; and Simon Fraser University.
Daily rhythms of food anticipatory activity (FAA) are regulated independently of the suprachiasmatic nucleus, which mediates entrainment of rhythms to light, but the neural circuits that establish FAA remain elusive. In this study, we show that mice lacking the dopamine D1 receptor (D1R KO mice) manifest greatly reduced FAA, whereas mice lacking the dopamine D2 receptor have normal FAA. To determine where dopamine exerts its effect, we limited expression of dopamine signaling to the dorsal striatum of dopamine-deficient mice; these mice developed FAA. Within the dorsal striatum, the daily rhythm of clock gene period2 expression was markedly suppressed in D1R KO mice. Pharmacological activation of D1R at the same time daily was sufficient to establish anticipatory activity in wild-type mice. These results demonstrate that dopamine signaling to D1R-expressing neurons in the dorsal striatum plays an important role in manifestation of FAA, possibly by synchronizing circadian oscillators that modulate motivational processes and behavioral output.
If you have ever traveled a long distance by plane, you will likely be familiar with jet lag. This disorientating sensation occurs because our brains have ‘internal clocks’ that keep track of the day-night cycle and control when we feel most tired or most alert. Flying rapidly from one time zone to another causes this clock to fall out of sync with the local time. It then takes time for the brain's clock to slowly adjust by responding to the levels of light and dark in the new environment.