 In mammals, breathing is the prime homeostatic process that regulates CO2 partial pressure (PCO2) in the blood. The respiratory chemoreflex modulates ventilation in response to deviations in arterial or brain PCO2, mainly through the detection of changes in pH (Feldman et al., 2003; Guyenet et al., 2010). These changes are sensed by central chemosensors located in the brainstem and by the carotid bodies in the periphery, but most of the CO2 chemosensory drive to breathe is thought to arise centrally (Smith et al., 2006; Duffin, 2010). The nature of the central chemosensors and of the circuits that mediate the ventilatory response to CO2 is still controversial (Guyenet et al., 2010; Huckstepp and Dale, 2011; Nattie, 2011; Guyenet et al., 2013). Two sites have been proposed to play a dominant role in the central CO2 response: serotonergic neurons in the medulla (Ray et al., 2011; Teran et al., 2014) and the retrotrapezoid nucleus (RTN), a loose collection of neurons located ventral and immediately caudal to the facial nucleus (Goridis et al., 2010; Guyenet et al., 2013). RTN neurons—defined by their location, by the expression of Phox2b and of the vesicular glutamate transporter-2 Vglut2 (also known as Slc17a6) and by the absence of markers for the nearby motor and catecholaminergic neurons—are vigorously activated by increases in CO2 (Mulkey et al., 2004; Onimaru et al., 2012b; Wang et al., 2013). Neurons with the molecular characteristics of RTN neurons are already present ventral of the facial nucleus in the late embryo. The embryonic RTN neurons, previously termed embryonic parafacial cells, were found to have endogenous bursting properties and to couple with and increase the frequency of the respiratory rhythm generating (Feldman et al., 2013) pre-Bötzinger complex (pre-BötC) (Dubreuil et al., 2009; Thoby-Brisson et al., 2009). We first verified the ability of embryonic RTN neurons to entrain the respiratory-like motor output using channelrhodopsin-based optogenetics. The Phox2b+ RTN neurons are glutamatergic (Bochorishvili et al., 2012) and express the glutamate transporter Vglut2 already at embryonic stages (Dubreuil et al., 2009). We could thus use expression of the channelrhodopsin-2-YFP (ChR2-YFP) fusion protein driven by the Vglut2 promoter in Vglut2::ChR2-YFP mice (Hägglund et al., 2010) to stimulate embryonic RTN neurons by light. In the transgenic embryos, cells co-expressing ChR2-YFP and Phox2b were concentrated at the medullary surface ventral to the ChR2-YFP-negative facial neurons, thus well accessible to light delivered from the ventral surface (Figure 1A-C). At embryonic-day 14.5 (E14.5), single light pulses (473 nm, 70 ms, 1-5 mW/mm2) applied to the RTN region in brainstem preparations systematically evoked a burst of action potentials in ChR2-YFP expressing cells (n = 5) that resembled the spontaneous rhythmic bursts (Figure 1D). A latency of 192 ± 12 ms (n = 51 stimulations in three cells) was measured from the time of onset of the light stimulus to that of the first action potential of the burst response suggesting the requirement of a still unknown, slow obligatory process for burst initiation in the RTN. 1 day later, when the preBötC is coupled to the RTN oscillator and drives a respiratory-like motor outflow (Thoby-Brisson et al., 2009), single light pulses (473 nm, 150 ms, 1-5 mW/mm2) delivered to the medullary surface triggered motor bursts in the C4 phrenic nerve roots (hereafter C4). When the light pulses were set to activate the RTN in a rhythmic manner at about twice the frequency of the ongoing endogenous rhythm, the C4 motor bursts could be entrained to the stimuli and followed the light-imposed rhythm (Figure 1E). C4 motor bursts could not be evoked when the preBötC excitability was depressed by the μ-opiate agonist D-Ala2-N-Me-Phe4-Glycol5-enkephalin (DAMGO, 0.3 μM, n = 4 preparations) (Mellen et al., 2003) (Figure 1F) or its development impaired genetically in Dbx1 null mutants (Bouvier et al., 2010) (n = 5 preparations) (Figure 1G) indicating that the motor outputs require an intact preBötC. These data suggest that malfunction of the RTN will result in lack of entrainment of the preBötC and thus of the motor output and in a slowed-down C4 activity.10.7554/eLife.07051.003Figure 1.Effect of photostimulating Vglut2::Chr2-expressing embryonic retrotrapezoid nucleus (RTN) neurons on membrane potential and motor output.(A) Cartoon of a ventral view of the hindbrain showing the position of nVII (dotted line), RTN (red outline), the preBötC and the C4 phrenic nerve roots. (B) Ventral view corresponding to the boxed area in A (anterior at top, lateral on the left) of the RTN (red outline) and nVII (stippled outline) in a Vglut2::ChR2-YFP embryo, labeled for the indicated markers. (C) Sagittal section, labeled for the indicated markers, showing the Phox2b+/YFP+/Islet1,2− cells ventral to nVII and optimally accessible to light. (D) Above, ventral view of YFP expression in the RTN region of an E14.5 Vglut2::ChR2-YFP embryo showing the three recorded and biocytin-filled RTN cells (left panel). A high magnification of the one in the boxed area is provided in the right panels showing biocytin and YFP labeling separately and the overlay. Below, membrane potential trajectory of the RTN cell shown at high magnification, featuring spontaneously rhythmic (stars) and light-evoked (blue bars) bursts of action potentials. (E) Left panel, photostimulation of the RTN region in E15.5 brainstem-spinal cord preparations from a Vglut2::ChR2-YFP embryo evokes Calcium Green-1 AM (ΔF/F) changes in the RTN and adjacent nVII. Right panel, integrated C4 recording in such a preparation showing spontaneous C4 bursts of activity (stars) and bursts evoked by photostimulation (blue bars). Note that the light pulses entrain the ongoing endogenous rhythm. (F) In the presence of DAMGO that depresses the excitability of the preBötC, but not of the RTN, photostimulation of the RTN region in E15.5 preparations still evokes ΔF/F changes in the RTN but not in nVII (left panel). Right panel, above, integrated C4 activity showing systematic failures of photostimulation to evoke C4 responses. Below, set of 10 superimposed C4 activity traces. (G) Same experiment in Vglut2::ChR2;Dbx1LacZ/LacZ mutants (n = 5) in which the preBötC but not the RTN is disrupted. The mutation completely abrogates light-evoked nVII and C4 responses.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.07051.003 In the mammalian CNS, localized networks of interneurons play critical roles in controlling behavior. It has, however, proved difficult to pinpoint the contribution of individual classes of neurons to defined behaviors. One example is the RTN. The RTN neurons have been implicated in breathing regulation by CO2, but their importance for the respiratory chemoreflex in the intact brain remains controversial (Huckstepp and Dale, 2011; Nattie, 2011; Guyenet et al., 2013). Here we reexamined this issue using novel genetic backgrounds inspired by prior evidence that RTN neurons express and require the Phox2b and Atoh1 transcription factors (Dubreuil et al., 2009; Rose et al., 2009b). We first established that the Phox2bon/Atoh1on subset of RTN neurons are (i) rhythmically active, (ii) are activated by low pH, and (iii) both necessary and sufficient for optogenetic entrainment of the phrenic nerve. These neurons thus have the functional signatures of RTN neurons (Abbott et al., 2009; Thoby-Brisson et al., 2009; Ramanantsoa et al., 2011). We then show that an Atoh1 constitutive null mutation and three conditional mutations specifically targeting Phox2bon/Atoh1on neurons and disrupting RTN formation or function abolish the CO2-evoked ventilatory response in neonates. Finally, we provide evidence that periV neurons, the only other group of neurons targeted by the conditional mutations, are not involved in the chemoreflex. We conclude that the neurons in the RTN region that have a history of both Phox2b and Atoh1 expression are obligatory elements of the circuitry for breathing regulation by CO2 in neonates. The following mouse lines were used in this study:Atoh1FRTCre. To generate the Atoh1FRTCRE allele, we inserted a neomycin resistance cassette with three consecutive SV40 polyadenylation sequences flanked by FRT sites at the 3′ of the Atoh1 CDS, which was followed by an IRES sequence and the Cre recombinase CDS (Figure 4A). The targeting vector was assembled in the K667 plasmid and electroporated into BD10(MCI-C57BL/6N Tac) ES cells. Correctly targeted ES cells were injected into C57BL/6 blastocysts. Construction of the targeting vector, ES cell manipulation and blastocyst injection were done by the Mouse Clinical Institute (Illkirch, France). The Atoh1FRTCre mice were genotyped for the presence of Cre by PCR (forward primer TGATGGACATGTTCAGGGATC, reverse primer GAAATCAGTGCGTTCGAACGCTAG).Atoh1Cre expressing Cre recombinase from the Atoh1 locus constitutively was derived from Atoh1FRTCre by germ-line expression of FLPe (Rodriguez et al., 2000). The Atoh1cre mice were genotyped for the presence of Cre and the absence of the neomycin gene (using GATCTCCTGTCATCTCACCT and ATGGGTCACGACGAGATCCT as PCR primers).Atoh1CreERT2. In the Atoh1CreERT2allele, the Atoh1 CDS is replaced by the CreERT2 sequence thus creating a null allele (Fujiyama et al., 2009), preserving transcription of the Atoh1 3′ UTR.P2b::CreBAC1, a BAC transgenic line expressing Cre recombinase from the Phox2b promoter in a pattern mirroring expression of the endogenous Phox2b gene (D'Autreaux et al., 2011).Atoh1lox, harboring a floxed Atoh1 locus generating a null allele upon Cre recombinase action (Shroyer et al., 2007). The Atoh1 3′ UTR is not expressed from the recombined Atoh1lox allele.TauGFPnLacZ, previously termed TaumGFP (Hippenmeyer et al., 2005) and R26tdTomato (Ai9, Madisen et al., 2010), floxed STOP reporter lines expressing GFP and nuclear βgalactosidase or tdTomato, respectively, in response to Cre recombinase action.P2b::FLPo, a BAC transgenic line, expressing FLPo recombinase from the Phox2b promoter in a manner mirroring expression of the endogenous Phox2b gene (Hirsch et al., 2013).Ai32 expressing a channelrhodopsin2-YFP fusion protein driven by the CAG promoter in the Rosa locus (Madisen et al., 2012) in response to Cre recombinase action.Vglut2::ChR2, a BAC transgenic line expressing a channelrhodopsin2-YFP fusion from the Vglut2 promoter (Hägglund et al., 2010).Phox2blox harboring a floxed Phox2b locus generating a null allele upon Cre recombinase action (Coppola et al., 2010).Vglut2lox harboring a floxed Vglut2 locus generating a null allele upon Cre recombinase action (Wallen-Mackenzie et al., 2006).Egr2Cre expressing Cre from the Egr2 locus (Voiculescu et al., 2000).
Maintaining constant CO2 and H+ concentrations in the arterial blood is critical for life. The principal mechanism through which this is achieved in mammals is the respiratory chemoreflex whose circuitry is still elusive. A candidate element of this circuitry is the retrotrapezoid nucleus (RTN), a collection of neurons at the ventral medullary surface that are activated by increased CO2 or low pH and project to the respiratory rhythm generator. Here, we use intersectional genetic strategies to lesion the RTN neurons defined by Atoh1 and Phox2b expression and to block or activate their synaptic output. Photostimulation of these neurons entrains the respiratory rhythm. Conversely, abrogating expression of Atoh1 or Phox2b or glutamatergic transmission in these cells curtails the phrenic nerve response to low pH in embryonic preparations and abolishes the respiratory chemoreflex in behaving animals. Thus, the RTN neurons expressing Atoh1 and Phox2b are a necessary component of the chemoreflex circuitry.
An adult at rest will typically breathe in and out up to 20 times per minute, inhaling oxygen and exhaling carbon dioxide in a process that, for the most part, occurs automatically. While we can choose to override this process and exert voluntary control over our breathing, we cannot suppress it indefinitely. Attempting to do so will ultimately trigger a reflex that forces us to start breathing again.