 When O'Keefe and Dostrovsky discovered that the firing of hippocampal place cells correlates strongly with the position of the rat with respect to discrete locations within the environment (the cell's place field) (O'Keefe and Dostrovsky, 1971), they launched decades of intensive research into how place cells contribute to an internal map of the environment (Best et al., 2001). That there is a considerable gulf between place cell firing and a cognitive spatial map, however, has become only clearer with time. Place cells appear to respond to a perplexing array of stimuli, from visual cues to head direction, goal planning, color changes, shape changes, and olfactory, vestibular and kinesthetic inputs, and discrepancies between the expected and actual location of a target (Harnad, 1994; Frank et al., 2000; Wood et al., 2000); recent work has shown that both spatial and nonspatial cell types in the entorhinal cortex provide myriad inputs to the hippocampus (Ideker et al., 2011). The fascination with place cell promiscuity, however, has tended to distract from the fact that cognition is the work not of individual neurons but of large ensembles of cells (Ludvig, 1999; Fenton et al., 2008). The nature of the information embedded in the place cell ensemble code and transmitted to downstream neurons has been largely ignored, along with the consequences for the type of spatial properties that might form the basis for the cognitive map. We devised two elevated U-shaped tracks with a flexible construction that allowed the geometry of one arm to be significantly altered while the rat was on the other part of the track. On the first track, Track A, each arm of the U could bend at four joints to transition from a straight runway in the expanded configuration to a compressed zigzag (Figure 1; ‘Materials and methods’). The dynamic configurations of the track were mapped against a stable set of spatial bins, which allowed us to dissociate two frames of reference: the effects produced on the CA1 place cells by changes in the track configuration can be described either in the reference frame associated with the room (the 2D planar reference frame) or with the track itself (the 1D linear reference frame). If path-integrating the 2D displacements, velocities and acceleration produces place fields that from an allocentric, Cartesian coordinate map of the space, the place fields should be relatively stable in the 2D plane, remaining in the same spatial bins despite changing track segments, and variable in the 1D frame of reference (See Figure 1, Figure 1—figure Supplement 1). In contrast, if the place cells attend to the sequence and connectivity of places experienced on the track irrespective of the track's geometry and the directions and angles of the rat's movements, then the place fields will be stable in the linear reference frame, but variable in the planar (2D) reference frame.10.7554/eLife.03476.003Figure 1.Compressible U/zigzag track (Track A).(A) Top-down view of the four-meter long track with both arms in a semi-contracted configuration. (B) A schematic representation of the track illustrating how the segments are numbered in the planar (B) and the linear (C) frames of reference. (Note that the track depiction in C is drawn at half the scale as in B. The track was designed so that the angle between the segments 1 and 2 and between segments 3 and 4 on the top arm remain the same whether the track arm is extended or compressed, that is, ∠(1,2) = ∠(3,4) = α. Similarly, the angles on the bottom arm remain equal, ∠(7,8) = ∠(9,10) = β. The magnitude of angle α is defined by the stretch of the top arm (by the position of the food well F1), and angle β is defined by the position of the food well F2. Thus, the geometric configuration of the track can be described either by the angles (α, β) or the positions of the food wells F1 and F2. (D) To more readily denote track arm configurations, we divided the space that can be occupied by the fully extended top and bottom arms into 12 vertical sections each. Each position of a track arm can be described by the numbered vertical section into which F1 or F2 (for the top and bottom arms, respectively) falls. In the depicted track configuration, F1 falls into section 2 and F2 falls into section 9. However, because we are interested in being able to denote changes in track segment positions in order to compute correlation coefficients, the top arm can be said to move from position i to position j (numbers in red), and the bottom arm from position k to position l (numbers in blue; see ‘Materials and methods’). So the track configuration depicted here can be fully described by F1 = 2 and F2 = 9. Given movement of an arm from section i to j (or k to l), the larger the difference between the numbers, d=|i − j | or |k − l|, the more geometrically dissimilar positions i and j or k and l are.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.03476.00310.7554/eLife.03476.004Figure 1—figure supplement.1.Calculating correlation coefficients for place cells firing in different track configurations.The grid covering the 2D space occupied by the track is binned into squares that are 3 cm × 3 cm. The red line illustrates how we sequenced the bins in the planar and linear reference frames, with m = 1 at the top right square, m = 2 the square below it, etc. The activity vector ui or uj is the firing rate of a place cell given a particular track configuration (i on the left, j on the right, respectively) in the 2D frame of reference and is constituted by the firing rates of the cell in particular bins (ui1, ui2, etc). In the example in panel A, the same spatial bin produces vector components ui,m (in configuration i) and uj,m (in track configuration j). We calculate the correlation coefficient, Ci,j, to understand the relationship between two activity vectors for a given place cell firing in two different track configurations (for the sake of simplicity, we depict only a change of position in the top arm, from i to j; we can do this safely because the place cells we recorded did not have multiple place fields). Note that any given configuration can be arrived at from a number of movements: the top arm could move to position 2 from vertical sections 1 or 3, 7, or 10 (see Figure 1D), so the correlation coefficient for a cell that has a place field on the top arm, Ci,j would be denoted by C1,2, C3,2, C7,2, or C10,2, respectively. As explained in Figure 1D, the greater the numeric difference between i and j, the greater the geometric difference between track configurations 1 and 2. The correlation matrix in the middle graphically depicts correlation coefficients by color. In panel B we show activity vectors vi, vj for linearized trajectories of the animal along the same configurations i and j depicted in 2D in panel A.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.03476.004 By explicitly counterposing geometry and topology in this series of experiments, we have demonstrated that hippocampal place cells show a remarkable degree of stability with respect to even dramatic geometrical changes in the environment: they retained their relative order and connectivity despite routes involving diametrically opposite protrusions and orientations. As long as the sequence of spaces experienced remains the same, in other words, and the place fields still overlap, it would appear not to matter to the hippocampus if the place fields are stretched by two centimeters or twenty. We therefore propose that place cells do not represent locations in space but rather provide a spatial context for experience (Eichenbaum et al., 1999; Moser et al., 2008). We built the tracks as follows: track A (Figure 1A) consisted of 10 straight segments 35-40 cm long each (total length ∼4 m), shown in color in Figure 1B. The width of the segments (∼8 cm) and the height of the rim (3 cm) were fixed over the whole length of the track with the exception of the circular joint areas (120 mm in diameter) between the track segments that had no outer rims. While the two leftmost segments, 5 and 6, remained fixed, the four segments 1-4 of the top arm and the segments 7-10 of the bottom arm could move, so that segments 1 and 10 could be displaced over the full span of ∼140 cm each.
The role of the hippocampus in spatial cognition is incontrovertible yet controversial. Place cells, initially thought to be location-specifiers, turn out to respond promiscuously to a wide range of stimuli. Here we test the idea, which we have recently demonstrated in a computational model, that the hippocampal place cells may ultimately be interested in a space's topological qualities (its connectivity) more than its geometry (distances and angles); such higher-order functioning would be more consistent with other known hippocampal functions. We recorded place cell activity in rats exploring morphing linear tracks that allowed us to dissociate the geometry of the track from its topology. The resulting place fields preserved the relative sequence of places visited along the track but did not vary with the metrical features of the track or the direction of the rat's movement. These results suggest a reinterpretation of previous studies and new directions for future experiments.
The hippocampus is one of the most easily recognizable structures in the brain owing to its characteristic seahorse-like shape. Brain imaging studies in the 1990s famously showed the hippocampus to be larger in London taxi drivers than in other people, suggesting that it plays a role in spatial navigation. This was consistent with previous findings in rodents, which had shown that the hippocampus is active when animals find their way through mazes.