 Memory retrieval is not a passive phenomenon. Previous studies have presented evidence that memory retrieval is a dynamic process during which memories can be made stronger, weaker, or their content altered (Misanin et al., 1968; Schneider and Sherman, 1968; Lewis, 1979; Mactutus et al., 1979; Gordon, 1981; Nader et al., 2000; Nader and Hardt, 2009; Dudai, 2012). Recent studies have shown that reactivated memory becomes labile after retrieval and is re-stabilized through a gene expression-dependent process known as memory reconsolidation. Memory reconsolidation after retrieval may be used to maintain or update long-term memories, reinforcing or integrating new information into them (Nader et al., 2000; Dudai, 2002; Tronel et al., 2005). However, the function of memory reconsolidation still remains unclear; especially, whether memory reconsolidation strengthens the original memory (Tronson et al., 2006; Inda et al., 2011; Pedroso et al., 2013). Importantly, the reinforcement of traumatic memory after retrieval (i.e., re-experience such as flashbacks or nightmares) may be associated with the development of emotional disorders such as post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). The mice were first placed in the light compartment. A brief electrical footshock was delivered (Training) 5 s after they entered the dark compartment. The mice were re-exposed to the light compartment 24 hr later and we assessed their crossover latency to enter the dark compartment (Reactivation session). Immediately after they entered the dark compartment, the mice were returned to their home cage and crossover latency was assessed 48 hr later (post-reactivation long-term memory test, PR-LTM). The control group (treated with vehicle, VEH) displayed significantly increased crossover latency in Reactivation (398.9 plus-minus 48.31 s) compared to Training (19.7 plus-minus 1.68 s), indicating that the mice formed and retrieved IA memory (Figure 1A). Interestingly, the VEH group displayed further and significantly increased crossover latency at PR-LTM (1553.5 plus-minus 193.81 s) compared to Reactivation, suggesting that memory retrieval enhanced IA memory in our experimental condition. This ability of retrieval to enhance memories is consistent with previous work (Gordon, 1981).10.7554/eLife.02736.003Figure 1.Memory retrieval can enhance inhibitory avoidance memory in a manner that is blocked by inhibiting protein synthesis.(A) Re-exposure to the light compartment until mice entered the dark compartment at 1 d after training. The VEH group showed enhancement of inhibitory avoidance (IA) memory (n = 10). The ANI group showed disruption of reactivated IA memory (n = 9). (B) At 3 d after training, a similar pattern was observed (VEH, n = 8; ANI, n = 12). (C) At 7 d after Reactivation (VEH, n = 8; ANI, n = 8). (D) Re-exposure to the light compartment for 3 min, but not 0 min (NR), led to IA memory enhancement (0 min: VEH, n = 8, ANI, n = 8; 3 min: VEH, n = 8, ANI, n = 9). (E) Positive correlation of crossover latency between the Reactivation and PR-LTM sessions (n = 96, r2 = 0.646). (F) Re-exposure to the dark compartment for 3 min following re-exposure to the light compartment. The VEH group showed long-term extinction of IA memory, while ANI blocked this (VEH, n = 10; ANI, n = 10). (G) CREB-mediated transcription is required for memory reconsolidation in the protocol used in Figure 1A (WT/VEH, n = 9; WT/TAM, n = 9; CREBIR/VEH, n = 9; CREBIR/TAM, n = 9). ANI: anisomycin; CREB: cAMP responsive element binding protein; CREBIR: inducible CREB repressor (CREBIR) transgenic mice; IA: inhibitory avoidance; NR: non-reactivated; PR-LTM: post-reactivation long-term memory test; TAM: tamoxifen; VEH: vehicle; WT: wild-type mice. Error bars, SEM. *p<0.05, **p<0.005; paired t test. The results of the statistical analyses are presented in Figure 1—source data 1.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.02736.00310.7554/eLife.02736.004Figure 1—source data 1.Summary of statistical analyses with F values.The asterisks indicate a significant difference.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.02736.00410.7554/eLife.02736.005Figure 1—figure supplement 1.Correlational analyses of crossover latency between the Training and Reactivation sessions.The crossover latency of individual mice of all VEH groups used in our current study (n = 96) was compared between Training and Reactivation. No significant positive correlation of crossover latency was observed between Training and Reactivation (r2 = 0.106; p>0.05).DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.02736.005 Retrieval has been thought to have a role in enhancing memory that requires activation of gene expression and signal transduction pathways such as mTOR (Gordon, 1981; Nader et al., 2000; Nader and Hardt, 2009; Inda et al., 2011; Pedroso et al., 2013). In this study, we developed IA paradigms in which the retrieval of fear memory triggers reconsolidation without inducing memory extinction; the reconsolidation and extinction phases are discriminated at the time point when the mice enter a dark compartment from a light compartment. Using this paradigm, we found that memory retrieval enhances IA memory through reconsolidation. In contrast to the mechanisms for the reinforcement of contextual fear memory by additional learning, the enhancement of IA memory by retrieval required CREB-mediated gene expression and calcineurin-induced proteasome-dependent protein degradation not only in the amygdala but also in the hippocampus and mPFC. Consistently, IA memory retrieval was suggested to induce synaptic plasticity in these brain regions through the phosphorylation of AMPAR. Interestingly, we further found that the amygdala is required for the reconsolidation and enhancement of IA memory, whereas the hippocampus and mPFC are required for the enhancement, but not reconsolidation, of IA memory. These findings suggest that an IA memory is enhanced/reconsolidated through the reactivation of memory circuits consisting of multiple brain regions including the amygdala, hippocampus, and mPFC and that the amygdala plays central and distinct roles from the hippocampus and mPFC in the enhancement/reconsolidation of IA memory. It is important to investigate further the differences in the roles of the hippocampus and mPFC in the enhancement of an IA memory. All experiments were conducted according to the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals (Japan Neuroscience Society) and the Guide for the Tokyo University of Agriculture. All of the animal experiments performed in this study were approved by the Animal Care and Use Committee of Tokyo University of Agriculture (authorization number: 250013). Male C57BL/6N mice were obtained from Charles River (Yokohama, Japan). Transgenic mice expressing an inducible CREB repressor (CREBIR mice) were backcrossed to C57BL/6N mice (National Institutes of Health) (Kida et al., 2002; Suzuki et al., 2008; Mamiya et al., 2009). The mice were housed in cages of five or six animals each, maintained on a 12 hr light/dark cycle, and allowed ad libitum access to food and water. The mice were at least 8 weeks of age when tested. Testing was performed during the light phase of the cycle. All experiments were conducted blind to the treatment condition of the mice.
Memory retrieval is considered to have roles in memory enhancement. Recently, memory reconsolidation was suggested to reinforce or integrate new information into reactivated memory. Here, we show that reactivated inhibitory avoidance (IA) memory is enhanced through reconsolidation under conditions in which memory extinction is not induced. This memory enhancement is mediated by neurons in the amygdala, hippocampus, and medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) through the simultaneous activation of calcineurin-induced proteasome-dependent protein degradation and cAMP responsive element binding protein-mediated gene expression. Interestingly, the amygdala is required for memory reconsolidation and enhancement, whereas the hippocampus and mPFC are required for only memory enhancement. Furthermore, memory enhancement triggered by retrieval utilizes distinct mechanisms to strengthen IA memory by additional learning that depends only on the amygdala. Our findings indicate that reconsolidation functions to strengthen the original memory and show the dynamic nature of reactivated memory through protein degradation and gene expression in multiple brain regions.
Video cameras allow us to record events as they happen. When we look back at a video clip, what we see is an exact replica of what was originally recorded. We tend to assume that our memories work in a similar manner. However, recent research suggests that our memories may be more malleable than we realize. Once a memory has been reactivated, it goes through a process known as reconsolidation that can make it stronger or weaker, or that can change its content.