 Behaviors are executed through coordinated activity of multiple groups of motor neurons and their muscle targets. Coordination of jaw and tongue muscles during feeding behaviors represents one of the most intricate mechanisms of the motor system and has been observed in a wide range of animals including humans (Gerstner and Goldberg, 1991; Thexton and McGarrick, 1994; Takada et al., 1996; Palmer et al., 1997; Ishiwata et al., 2000; Miller, 2002). Here, coordination concerns primarily the adjustment of both timing and sequence of muscle activation to enable smooth, effective jaw and tongue movements. Three basic forms of coordination are consistently observed in feeding behaviors. First, the left and right jaw muscle activities are temporally symmetric, which is necessary because the mandible is joined by ligaments at the midline. Second, during chewing the activity of the tongue and jaw muscles is held to a similar low frequency rhythm, with the tongue positioning food between the surfaces of the teeth while the jaw moves the teeth to break down food (Thexton and McGarrick, 1994; Takada et al., 1996; Hiyama et al., 2000; Naganuma et al., 2001; Yamamura et al., 2002). Third, during chewing (Gerstner and Goldberg, 1991; Liu et al., 1993; Naganuma et al., 2001), licking (Travers et al., 1997), and suckling (Thexton et al., 1998), the tongue-protruding and jaw-opening muscles are co-active during jaw opening, while tongue-retracting and jaw-closing muscles are co-active during jaw closing. This co-activation also occurs in cortically-induced fictive mastication and occurs regardless of the frequency of cortical stimulation or the intensity of sensory stimuli applied (Gerstner and Goldberg, 1991; Liu et al., 1993). As described in the ‘Materials and methods’ and schematically illustrated in Figure 1, we have developed a mouse line, Chat::Cre; RΦGT, that enables us to inject deficient rabies virus (ΔG-RV) into desired muscles resulting in transsynaptic tracing of the corresponding premotor circuitry in neonatal mice (Takatoh et al., 2013). For further description and discussion of this method, see the ‘Materials and methods’ and associated Figure 1—figure supplement 1. The masseter is the primary jaw-closing muscle and is innervated by motoneurons located in the trigeminal motor nucleus (MoV). Masseter activity is coordinated with other muscles in multiple orofacial behaviors including suckling, chewing, biting, and vocalization (Travers et al., 1997). To investigate the premotor circuitry controlling the masseter motoneurons, we injected ΔG-RV-EGFP into the left masseter of P1 Chat::Cre; RΦGT mouse pups (Figure 1). 7 days later at P8 (P1→P8 tracing), we serial sectioned and imaged the brains to visualize the transsynaptically labeled masseter premotor neurons.10.7554/eLife.02511.003Figure 1.Schematics detailing the premotor circuit tracing strategy.(A) Illustration of viral injection sites used in this study. Left, the jaw-closing masseter muscle; right, the genioglossus: a muscle of the tongue controlling protrusion. (B) Genetic cross used in this study. Arrow indicates action of Cre recombinase on the RΦGT locus enabling rabies G expression in motoneurons. (C) ΔG-RV injection into a selected muscle results in infection of motor axons innervating that muscle. Complementation of the virus with endogenous rabies G in motoneurons results in transsynaptic retrograde labeling of premotor neurons. Retrograde passage is halted at one synapse due to lack of complementation in premotor neurons. Inset, pups were injected at post-natal day 1 (P1), and their brainstems were analyzed at post-natal day 8 (P8).DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.02511.00310.7554/eLife.02511.004Figure 1—figure supplement 1.Extremely rare labeling of ChAT+ premotor neurons in masseter and genioglossus premotor tracing studies.The brains from monosynaptic rabies tracing experiments were immunostained for choline acetyltransferase (ChAT). Examples of rarely labeled ChAT+ premotor neurons in the masseter (A) and genioglossus (B) premotor circuits. Such rare labeling was inconsistent between samples, and could account for some of the sporadic, inconsistent labeling observed between mice (See Tables 1 and 2, and ‘Results’).DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.02511.004 In this study, we used a monosynaptic rabies virus-based tracing technology to systematically map the premotor circuitry for jaw-closing (masseter) and tongue-protruding (genioglossus) muscles. The premotor wiring diagrams for these two motoneuron groups are summarized in Figure 8D. Our results provide the anatomical framework for future functional dissection of the neural control of orofacial behaviors. Moreover, we found that in both cases, some premotor neurons traced from one muscle also form synaptic boutons onto distinct motoneurons located in different motor nuclei. These results uncover a set of simple premotor circuit configurations that are ideally suited to orchestrate the orofacial coordination observed in previous behavioral studies as discussed in detail below.10.7554/eLife.02511.018Figure 8.Summary of premotor circuit tracing results and models for circuit mechanisms underlying several aspects of motor coordination.(A) Models for ensuring bilaterally symmetric jaw movements. (A1) Previous model based on interactions of independent CPGs on each side of the brainstem. (A2) A model based on this study; signals from one CPG are relayed to motoneurons on both sides through premotor neurons. Dashed circle indicates the possibility of jaw premotor neurons being part of the CPG or distinct targets of the CPG. (B) Models for inter-muscular co-activation. (B1) Previous model based on interactions between muscle-specific premotor CPGs. (B2) A model based on this study: inter-muscular co-activation could occur through a subpopulation of shared premotor neurons that provide the same input to multiple motor groups. (C) Models for anti-phase activation of antagonistic muscles. (C1) A CPG-interaction model based on reciprocal inhibition of muscle-specific CPGs. (C2) A hypothetical model extending from the in situ results and intracellular recordings conducted in previous studies. An interconnected rhythm-generating network could provide both excitatory and inhibitory outputs onto motoneurons. Blue neurons fire to activate masseter motoneurons and inhibit excitatory output onto genioglossus motoneurons (blue rhythmic activity trace), while green neurons fire to activate genioglossus motoneurons and inhibit masseter motoneurons (anti-phase green rhythmic activity trace). (D) A summary diagram of the various shared and distinct premotor nuclei containing neurons projecting to the masseter or genioglossus motoneurons. Green represents inputs to genioglossus motoneurons, while blue represents inputs to masseter motoneurons. Thickness of line denotes percentage of premotor inputs arising from a specific nucleus as determined in Tables 1 and 2. Large solid line: >30%; medium solid line: 10-30%; small solid line: 1-10%; dotted line: <1%.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.02511.018 All experimental protocols were approved by the Duke University Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee.
Feeding behaviors require intricately coordinated activation among the muscles of the jaw, tongue, and face, but the neural anatomical substrates underlying such coordination remain unclear. In this study, we investigate whether the premotor circuitry of jaw and tongue motoneurons contain elements for coordination. Using a modified monosynaptic rabies virus-based transsynaptic tracing strategy, we systematically mapped premotor neurons for the jaw-closing masseter muscle and the tongue-protruding genioglossus muscle. The maps revealed that the two groups of premotor neurons are distributed in regions implicated in rhythmogenesis, descending motor control, and sensory feedback. Importantly, we discovered several premotor connection configurations that are ideally suited for coordinating bilaterally symmetric jaw movements, and for enabling co-activation of specific jaw, tongue, and facial muscles. Our findings suggest that shared premotor neurons that form specific multi-target connections with selected motoneurons are a simple and general solution to the problem of orofacial coordination.
Chewing requires highly coordinated movements of the tongue and jaw. The tongue pushes food around the mouth, keeping it within reach of the teeth, while rhythmic movements of the jaw enable the teeth to grind up food without injuring the tongue itself. However, despite the importance of tongue-jaw coordination, the neuroanatomical circuits that underlie it have not been studied in detail. Stanek et al. have now mapped these neural circuits using a cutting edge tracing technique in mice.