 There is significant empirical support for the idea, proposed by Ramón Y Cajal more than a century ago (Cajal, 1894), that long-term memories are expressed in the brain, in part, by changes in synaptic connectivity. A corollary of this idea, accepted by many, if not most, modern neuroscientists, is that memories are maintained by persistent molecular and cellular alterations in synaptic structures themselves (Bailey and Kandel, 2008; Kandel et al., 2014). Here, we have tested the idea that long-term memory (LTM) is stored at synapses using the marine mollusk Aplysia californica. The relatively simple behavior and nervous system of this model invertebrate organism offer several major advantages for understanding memory at the level of modifications of individual synapses (Kandel, 2001). A form of learning in Aplysia whose cellular and molecular substrates are particularly well understood is sensitization of the gill- and siphon-withdrawal reflex (Carew et al., 1971; Brunelli et al., 1976; Antonov et al., 1999; Kandel, 2001; Glanzman, 2010). Sensitization of the withdrawal reflex exhibits a long-term (≥24 hr) form (Pinsker et al., 1973) due, in part, to long-term facilitation (LTF) of the monosynaptic connection between the sensory and motor neurons that mediate the reflex (Frost et al., 1985). Importantly, the monosynaptic sensorimotor connection can be reconstituted in dissociated cell culture, and LTF of the in vitro synapse can be induced by training with pulses of serotonin (5HT), the monoaminergic neurotransmitter that mediates sensitization in Aplysia (Brunelli et al., 1976; Glanzman et al., 1989; Marinesco and Carew, 2002). Cellular and molecular analyses of this form of long-term synaptic plasticity have provided major mechanistic insights into long-term memory in Aplysia (Goelet et al., 1986; Dash et al., 1990; Bartsch et al., 1995; Martin et al., 1997), insights that have generalized to learning and memory in other organisms, including mammals (Yin et al., 1994, 1995; Frey and Morris, 1997; Kogan et al., 1997; Josselyn et al., 2001). Accordingly, we used the in vitro sensorimotor synapse in initial experiments to determine whether LTM is stored at synapses. In electrophysiological experiments involving 5HT-induced LTF of sensorimotor synapses in dissociated cell culture, we previously showed that a ‘reminder’ stimulus—a single, 5-min pulse of 5HT—could trigger the apparent reconsolidation of synaptic memory, as indicated by the vulnerability of consolidated LTF to disruption by administration of a protein synthesis inhibitor (anisomycin) following the reminder. Specifically, treatment with a single pulse of 5HT and anisomycin 24 hr or more after the induction of LTF reversed the synaptic facilitation (Cai et al., 2012; see also; Lee et al., 2012; Hu and Schacher, 2014). Here we asked whether the blockade of the reconsolidation of LTF also reverses the synaptic growth that underlies LTF (Glanzman et al., 1990). The present morphological results, together with those of our previous behavioral and electrophysiological investigations (Cai et al., 2011, 2012), suggest that the persistence of sensitization-related LTM in Aplysia does not require the persistence of the synaptic connections generated during learning. Rather, LTM appears to be regulated by a homeostatic mechanism that specifies the net synaptic strength according to experience. Following 5X5HT stimulation, we observed that the number of presynaptic varicosities in the sensorimotor cocultures increased to a new overall value, and that this value was maintained despite the appearance and disappearance of individual varicosities. Furthermore, blockade of memory reconsolidation, or inhibition of PKM, reset the number of varicosities to the original, non-facilitated value. Remarkably, this resetting did not result from the straightforward retraction of the varicosities that appeared by 24 hr after 5X5HT stimulation, varicosities whose growth coincides with LTF (Glanzman et al., 1990); rather, the resetting was produced by a complex reorganization that involved retraction of both 5HT-induced and original varicosities, as well as growth of new, additional varicosities. Thus, for any given sensorimotor connection, the homeostatic regulatory mechanism appeared indifferent to the identities of the particular presynaptic varicosities and, presumably, active zones (Schacher et al., 1990), that mediated baseline synaptic transmission and synaptic facilitation. Our data argue that synapses are not ‘tagged’ with respect to memory storage, at least for a connection involving a single SN and a single MN; the data may therefore reflect a fundamental distinction between the cellular and molecular processes of LTM storage and those of LTM induction in Aplysia, in which synaptic tagging plays a critical role (Martin et al., 1997). The data also suggest that synaptic change is an expression mechanism, rather than a storage mechanism, for LTM in Aplysia (although see below). The sensorimotor cocultures consisted of one pleural SN and one small siphon (LFS-type) MN. Adult abdominal ganglia and pleural ganglia were removed from 60-100 g Aplysia and then incubated in protease (10 mg/ml Dispase II [Roche Applied Science, Indianapolis, IN] in Leibowitz-15 [L-15, Sigma, St Louis, MO]) for 2 hr at 35°C before desheathing. The appropriate amounts of salts were added to the L15 to yield the following concentrations in mM: 400 NaCl, 11 CaCl2, 10 KCl, 27 MgSO4, 27 MgCl2, 2 NaHCO3. Additionally, the L15 was supplemented with penicillin (50 unit/ml), streptomycin (50 µg/ml), dextrose (6 mg/ml) and glutamine (0.1 mg/ml). After desheathing, SNs and MNs were individually dissociated from ganglia and paired in cell culture. The culture medium contained 50% Aplysia hemolymph and 50% L-15. The cultures were maintained at 18°C in an incubator for 3 day before the start of the experiments. The SNs and MNs were labeled with the intracellular dyes dextran fluorescein and dextran rhodamine B (Molecular Probes, Eugene, OR), respectively, on Day 3/4 in culture. The dyes were dissolved in 0.2 M KCl with 0.25% fast green (final concentration of 10 mg/ml) and then microinjected into cells via brief pressure pulses (6-12 MΩ resistance electrodes, 10-20 psi for 2-5 pulses [40 ms]).
Long-term memory (LTM) is believed to be stored in the brain as changes in synaptic connections. Here, we show that LTM storage and synaptic change can be dissociated. Cocultures of Aplysia sensory and motor neurons were trained with spaced pulses of serotonin, which induces long-term facilitation. Serotonin (5HT) triggered growth of new presynaptic varicosities, a synaptic mechanism of long-term sensitization. Following 5HT training, two antimnemonic treatments—reconsolidation blockade and inhibition of PKM—caused the number of presynaptic varicosities to revert to the original, pretraining value. Surprisingly, the final synaptic structure was not achieved by targeted retraction of the 5HT-induced varicosities but, rather, by an apparently arbitrary retraction of both 5HT-induced and original synapses. In addition, we find evidence that the LTM for sensitization persists covertly after its apparent elimination by the same antimnemonic treatments that erase learning-related synaptic growth. These results challenge the idea that stable synapses store long-term memories.
Cells called neurons allow information to travel quickly around the body so that we can rapidly respond to any changes that we sense in our environment. This includes non-conscious reactions, such as the knee-jerk reflex in humans.