 The peripheral olfactory system is unparalleled in its ability to detect and discriminate amongst an extremely large number of volatile compounds in the environment. To detect this wide variety of volatiles, most organisms have evolved large families of receptor genes that typically encode 7-transmembrane proteins expressed in the olfactory neurons (Buck and Axel, 1991; Clyne et al., 1999; de Bruyne and Baker, 2008; Vosshall et al., 1999; Dahanukar et al., 2005). Each volatile chemical in the environment is thought to interact with a specific subset of odorant receptors depending upon odor structure and binding sites on the receptor. This precise detection and coding of odors by the peripheral olfactory neurons are subsequently processed, transformed and integrated in the central nervous system to generate specific behavioral responses that are critical for survival such as finding food, finding mates, avoiding predators etc (van der Goes van Naters and Carlson, 2006). Since the structure of receptor protein complexes is not known, we analyzed receptor-odor interactions by applying the ‘similarity property principle’, which reasons that structurally similar molecules (e.g., activating odorants) are more likely to have similar properties (Hendrickson, 1991; Martin et al., 2002). Although this general approach has been useful in the area of pharmaceuticals (Martin et al., 2002; Keiser et al., 2009), receptor-odor analysis presents significant additional challenges. Not only are odorant molecules generally smaller in size than pharmaceuticals (average MW of known odors ∼threefold less than FDA approved pharmaceuticals [Wishart et al., 2008]) and therefore offer fewer structural features for differentiation, they are also detected by the receptors with specificity at extremely low concentrations in the volatile phase (Hallem and Carlson, 2006; Kreher et al., 2008). Additionally, odorant receptors are differentially tuned and can sometimes appear not to follow distinct structural rules: odors that look structurally different can strongly activate the same receptor, while odors that appear very similar may have very different levels of activity (Hallem and Carlson, 2006). For example, while hexanal and γ-octalactone are structurally very different, they both strongly activate Or85b (Hallem and Carlson, 2006). Alternatively, while hexanal and pentanal are structurally very similar, they have very different activities against Or85b (Hallem and Carlson, 2006). A primary element of the olfactory code is information about odor identity, represented by the characteristic interaction of an odor with the ensemble of olfactory receptors in the nose. Here we report an in silico approach to systematically identify ligands from a vast chemical space for a large number of Ors expressed in the antenna of Drosophila. We demonstrate that our predictions are accurate using two different validation approaches—computational validations and functional validation using electrophysiology. There is a strong correlation between ranks of predicted ligands to electrophysiological activity. We assembled a subset of 3197 volatile compounds from annotated origins including plants (Knudsen et al., 2006), insects (El-Sayed, 2009), humans, and a fragrance collection (Sigma-Aldrich, 2007) that may have additional fruit and floral volatiles (Zeng et al., 1991; Cork and Park, 1996; Zeng et al., 1996; Meijerink et al., 2000; Curran et al., 2005; Knudsen et al., 2006; Gallagher et al., 2008; Logan et al., 2008). We also assembled a subset of 241,150 odors from Pubchem, which have similar characteristics to known odor molecules. Compounds met a criteria of MW <200 and only being composed of the following atoms (C, O, N, H, I, Cl, S, F).
Coding of information in the peripheral olfactory system depends on two fundamental factors: interaction of individual odors with subsets of the odorant receptor repertoire and mode of signaling that an individual receptor-odor interaction elicits, activation or inhibition. We develop a cheminformatics pipeline that predicts receptor-odorant interactions from a large collection of chemical structures (>240,000) for receptors that have been tested to a smaller panel of odorants (∼100). Using a computational approach, we first identify shared structural features from known ligands of individual receptors. We then use these features to screen in silico new candidate ligands from >240,000 potential volatiles for several Odorant receptors (Ors) in the Drosophila antenna. Functional experiments from 9 Ors support a high success rate (∼71%) for the screen, resulting in identification of numerous new activators and inhibitors. Such computational prediction of receptor-odor interactions has the potential to enable systems level analysis of olfactory receptor repertoires in organisms.
Although our sense of smell is regarded as inferior to that of many other species, we can nevertheless distinguish between roughly 10,000 different odors. These are made up of molecules called odorants, each of which activates a specific subset of odorant receptors in the nose. However, much of what we know about this process has come from studying the fruit fly, Drosophila, which detects odors using receptors located mainly on its antennae.