 Central pattern generator (CPG) circuits give rise to common behaviors such as swimming, walking, and breathing (Grillner, 2006; Grillner and Jessell, 2009; Kiehn, 2011). To understand the cellular origins of these behaviors, key problems are to identify the rhythmogenic and premotor populations, and then quantify the requisite number of neurons to sustain functionality. We address these issues in the mammalian breathing CPG by cumulatively ablating a genetically identified interneuron population hypothesized to form the rhythmogenic core while monitoring effects on network output in real time. Dbx1 neurons were detected and mapped within the preBötC, and then laser ablated individually, in sequence, while monitoring respiratory network functionality via XII motor nerve output. Experiments began with an ‘initialization phase’ that defined the domain for detection and ablation, which was bilateral. We used a Dbx1 Cre-driver line (Dbx1CreERT2) coupled with floxed reporter mice (Gt(ROSA)26Sorflox-stop-tdTomato) to locate Dbx1 neurons via fluorescence. Viewed in the transverse plane of slices that expose the preBötC at their surface (i.e., preBötC-surface slices), Dbx1 neurons form a bilaterally symmetrical V-shape starting dorsally at the border of the XII motor nuclei and continuing ventrolaterally to the preBötC (Figure 1A and Figure 1—figure supplement 1A). Dorsally, the preBötC adjoins the semi-compact division of the nucleus ambiguus (scNA); the ventral border of the preBötC is orthogonal to the dorsal boundary of the principal sub-nucleus of the inferior olive (IOPloop) (Ruangkittisakul et al., 2011, 2014). These spatial relationships visible in bright field or epifluorescence allow us to pinpoint the preBötC (Figure 1A). At the cellular level, identifying putative rhythmogenic neurons on the basis of fluorescent protein expression alone is acceptable because the overwhelming majority of Dbx1 preBötC neurons are inspiratory (e.g., Figure 1B) (Picardo et al., 2013).10.7554/eLife.03427.003Figure 1.Dbx1 preBötC neurons.(A) Bright field (left) and fluorescence (right) images of the right half of a preBötC-surface slice preparation. Anatomical landmarks are illustrated including: XII, the hypoglossal motor nucleus; scNA, semi-compact nucleus ambiguus; IOPloop, the dorsal loop of the principal inferior olive; and the ventral border of the preBötC, which is orthogonal to the IOPloop. Scale bar is 300 µm. At right, the larger white box shows the detection and ablation domain. (B) Expansion of smaller white box in A, showing tdTomato expression in Dbx1 neurons and intracellular dialysis via patch pipette with Alexa 488 from the recorded neuron whose robust inspiratory discharge is illustrated at right (scale bar is 10 µm). Respiratory motor output from the XII nerve is shown in raw and RMS-smoothed form. Voltage and time calibration bars represent 20 mV and 2 s. Baseline membrane potential in the recorded neuron was −60 mV. (C) Mask of targets showing validated Dbx1 interneuron targets (red) and regions of fluorescence that do not pass muster and were rejected as targets (blue) for focal planes at depths z = (30–60 µm). The region shown in each case maps to the 412 × 412 µm2 square shown by the larger white box in A (right). Only a subset of the masks are shown for economy of display. (D) 3D reconstruction of detected targets for all focal planes z = (10–80 µm) from the left and right preBötC. Each Dbx1 neuron is represented by a single red point centered on its soma.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.03427.00310.7554/eLife.03427.004Figure 1—figure supplement 1.Detection of Dbx1 preBötC neurons.(A) Fluorescent image of a transverse slice from a Dbx1+/CreERT2; Rosa26tdTomato mouse pup. Anatomical landmarks are illustrated including: XII, the hypoglossal motor nucleus; scNA, semi-compact nucleus ambiguus; and IOP, the principal inferior olive. The domain for detection and ablation is indicated by the white boxes, bilaterally. Scale bar is 500 µm. (B) Mask of targets showing validated Dbx1 (red) and invalidated (blue) cells for all focal planes to a depth of −80 µm. Each image is 412 × 412 µm2 (as in Figure 1C). Image processing routines for detecting and validating Dbx1 neuron targets are detailed in ‘Materials and methods’, Figure 1—figure supplement 2, and a methodological paper (Wang et al., 2013). Note that the highest fraction of validated Dbx1 target cells is found at deeper focal planes, e.g., −80 µm due to the ‘priority rule’, which applies to overlapping ROIs in adjacent focal planes. According to the priority rule, the ROI from the deeper focal is accepted as a ‘bona fide’ target and the redundant ROI at the superficial level is rejected. Also see Figure 1—figure supplement 2C,D.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.03427.00410.7554/eLife.03427.005Figure 1—figure supplement 2.Detection of Dbx1 neuron targets via fluorescence and image processing.(A1, B1, C1, D1) Images from the preBötC of Dbx1+/CreERT2; Rosa26tdTomato mice showing tdTomato in neurons derived from Dbx1-expressing precursors (i.e., Dbx1 neurons). Scale bar in A1 is 20 µm and applies to all panels. C1 and D1 show the same field of view at two different depths (−20 and −10 µm, respectively). (A2, B2, C2, D2) Masks of ROIs obtained by analyzing the corresponding images above. Red ROIs are deemed valid targets by the circularity test, which evaluates somatic shape; blue ROIs that fail the circularity test are rejected. Circularity analyses distinguish somata from auto-fluorescent detritus (A1, A2) as well as contiguous soma-dendrite images (B1, B2) and isolated segments (shafts) of dendrites (C1, C2, D1, D2). Non-somatic auto-fluorescence is rejected because it does not accurately indicate underlying neurons. Dendritic segments are not valid targets because they are difficult to target in the ablation phase of the experiments and their cell bodies are detectable in adjacent focal planes. Often, a cell rejected by the circularity test in one focal plane (e.g., C2, graygray double arrowhead) is validated in the adjacent plane (D2, graygray double arrowhead). When ROIs that pass the circularity test are detected in more than one focal plane, they are validated or rejected according to the priority rule. ROIs from a deeper focal plane (−20 µm) are validated by circularity and thus colored red (C2, circled ROIs). Subsequent detection of overlaying ROIs at the superficial focal plane (−10 µm), which also pass the circularity test, are nonetheless rejected by the priority rule and thus colored blue (D2, circled ROIs). These criteria for target detection are more fully described in ‘Materials and methods’ and Wang et al. (2013).DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.03427.00510.7554/eLife.03427.006Figure 1—figure supplement 3.Average number of Dbx1 neurons detected at each acquisition depth from z = 0 (surface) to z = −80 µm in preBötC-surface slices and control slices with the ventral respiratory column (VRC) exposed at the slice surface.The number of Dbx1 neurons detected per focal plane per side (in 10-µm increments of the focal plane) is shown individually for each individual experiment (graygray unfilled circles) along with the mean plus-minusSD for all experiments (black unfilled squares with black lines showing SD).DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.03427.006 Central pattern generators give rise to motor behaviors that are measurable in living animals as well as in reduced preparations that facilitate cellular-level investigations. To discover the core rhythmogenic and premotor interneurons that comprise CPGs and establish their functional parameters remain formidable problems, particularly in mammalian systems. The Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at The College of William & Mary, which ensures compliance with United States federal regulations concerning care and use of vertebrate animals in research, approved the following protocols. The anesthesia and surgery protocols are consistent with the 2011 guidelines of the Animal Research Advisory Committee, which is part of the Office of Animal Care and Use of the National Institutes of Health (Bethesda, MD).
To understand the neural origins of rhythmic behavior one must characterize the central pattern generator circuit and quantify the population size needed to sustain functionality. Breathing-related interneurons of the brainstem pre-Bötzinger complex (preBötC) that putatively comprise the core respiratory rhythm generator in mammals are derived from Dbx1-expressing precursors. Here, we show that selective photonic destruction of Dbx1 preBötC neurons in neonatal mouse slices impairs respiratory rhythm but surprisingly also the magnitude of motor output; respiratory hypoglossal nerve discharge decreased and its frequency steadily diminished until rhythm stopped irreversibly after 85plus-minus20 (mean plus-minus SEM) cellular ablations, which corresponds to ∼15% of the estimated population. These results demonstrate that a single canonical interneuron class generates respiratory rhythm and contributes in a premotor capacity, whereas these functions are normally attributed to discrete populations. We also establish quantitative cellular parameters that govern network viability, which may have ramifications for respiratory pathology in disease states.
Our first breath, moments after we are born, is the result of a pattern of activity in our brain that started in the embryo and will continue almost effortlessly until we die. Like other rhythmic activities, such as walking and swimming, breathing originates from circuits of neurons in the brain that generate patterns. These circuits pass messages to other cells that translate them into the physical movements required to take a breath. Interrupting these patterns by injury or illness can lead to breathing disorders or cause death.