 When animals encounter reward or harm, they form associations with concomitant environmental cues. Such associative memories allow an animal to predict upcoming events and to choose an appropriate behavior. Memory induced by appetitive and aversive events is usually not restricted to a single sensory cue. For example, a traumatic event drives aversive associative memories of concurrent auditory and visual stimuli in rats (Campeau and Davis, 1995). The same appetitive and aversive reinforcers drive both olfactory and visual memories in insects, while associative memories with different modalities are formed using the same neurotransmitter system (Unoki et al., 2005, 2006). However, the circuit mechanisms underlying memories of different sensory modalities driven by the same reinforcing stimulus are unknown. Two alternative circuit organizations are possible: each sensory modality may feed into a dedicated memory circuit, or representations of different sensory stimuli (e.g., olfactory and visual) may undergo associative modulation in a shared set of neurons in the brain (Zars, 2010). We previously developed an appetitive visual learning assay that shares critical features with olfactory conditioning (Figure 1A,B; Schnaitmann et al., 2010). In our assay, the visual stimuli (LEDs; Figure 1D) are projected from below through translucent sugar-soaked filter paper, the appetitive reinforcer used in olfactory conditioning. However, the commonly used aversive reinforcer, electric shock, is more difficult to integrate, as a metal grid beneath the fly would disrupt visual stimulation from below that is used in appetitive conditioning.10.7554/eLife.02395.003Figure 1.Modular appetitive and aversive visual learning.(A-C) Experimental setups for appetitive and aversive visual learning. Scheme shows single components (B) of exchangeable conditioning arenas for sugar reward (A) and electric shock punishment (C) that share the same light source and video camera (B). (B) Appetitive setup: cylindrical Fluon-coated arena closed from top with opaque lid during training or transparent lid during test. Exchangeable Petri dish on the bottom to present sugar or water soaked filter paper during training and neutral filter paper during test. Filter paper is clamped in the dish by a plastic ring. Aversive setup: the circular arena consists of a transparent electric shock grid, removable Fluon-coated plastic ring and transparent lid. The cylinder on top isolates each setup from the others and creates a similar closed visual scene as in the appetitive setup. (D) Visual stimulus source with one blue and one green high power LED per quadrant. (E) The conditioning arena with the transparent electric shock grid and a magnification with visual stimulation and a fly. Alternating stripes marked by + and − symbols indicate electric shock application. (F) Aversive visual memory depends on shock intensity (One-way ANOVA, p < 0.001). Flies show significant memory from 15 V (One sample t test, p < 0.001) n = 15. No difference in performance is found among 30-120 V (post-hoc pairwise comparisons p > 0.05) n = 16-30. Further parametric behavioral analyses for aversive conditioning are shown in Figure 1—figure supplement 1. Bars and error bars represent mean and SEM, respectively.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.02395.00310.7554/eLife.02395.004Figure 1—figure supplement 1.Conditioning with electric shock induces significant aversive visual memory.(A) For aversive visual memory a single training trial leads to significant aversive memory (One sample t test, p < 0.001). Further repetition of training does not lead to improvement in learning (one way ANOVA, p > 0.1). n = 16. (B) A single shock (1 s) before test facilitates the memory performance at 25°C (0 V; One sample t test, p > 0.05, 30-120 V; One sample t test, p < 0.001), n = 16. Bars and error bars represent mean and SEM, respectively. (C) Green preference of flies after aversive conditioning with 60 V at 25°C. During every second of the test green preference is calculated independently for both reciprocals (Blue+/Green+ represent punished color during training).DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.02395.004 Devising a transparent electric shock grid module made it possible to apply the same visual stimulation in aversive and appetitive conditioning assays. We also developed an integrated platform for fully automated high-throughput data acquisition using customized software to control the presentation of electric shock and visual stimuli while making video recordings of behavior (Figure 1; Schnaitmann et al., 2010, 2013). In our assays, memory performance is based on altered visual preference in walking flies, a task likely to be less demanding than the constant flight required for flight simulator learning. These advantages facilitate behavioral examination of many genotypes. Flies were reared at 25°C, at 60% relative humidity under a 12-12 hr light-dark cycle on a standard cornmeal-based food. As all transgenes were inserted into the w− mutant genome, the X chromosomes of strains were replaced with that of wild-type Canton-S (w+). We used F1 progenies of crosses between females of genotypes UAS-dTrpA1 (Hamada et al., 2008), UAS-shits (Kitamoto, 2001), MB247-GAL80;UAS-shits (Krashes et al., 2007), UAS-mCD8::GFP (Lee and Luo, 1999) or WT-females and males of genotypes TH-GAL4 (Friggi-Grelin et al., 2003), DDC-GAL4 (Li et al., 2000), R58E02-GAL4 (Liu et al., 2012), TDC2-GAL4 (Cole et al., 2005), MB247-GAL4 (Zars et al., 2000), c305a-GAL4 (Krashes et al., 2007), 17D-GAL4 (Martin et al., 1998), 201y-GAL4 (Yang et al., 1995), or Canton-S males. The expression patterns of drivers for KCs were compared previously (Aso et al., 2009). The dumb2 null mutant was used to localize the cells that receive dopamine signals (Kim et al., 2007).
In nature, animals form memories associating reward or punishment with stimuli from different sensory modalities, such as smells and colors. It is unclear, however, how distinct sensory memories are processed in the brain. We established appetitive and aversive visual learning assays for Drosophila that are comparable to the widely used olfactory learning assays. These assays share critical features, such as reinforcing stimuli (sugar reward and electric shock punishment), and allow direct comparison of the cellular requirements for visual and olfactory memories. We found that the same subsets of dopamine neurons drive formation of both sensory memories. Furthermore, distinct yet partially overlapping subsets of mushroom body intrinsic neurons are required for visual and olfactory memories. Thus, our results suggest that distinct sensory memories are processed in a common brain center. Such centralization of related brain functions is an economical design that avoids the repetition of similar circuit motifs.
Animals tend to associate good and bad things with certain visual scenes, smells and other kinds of sensory information. If we get food poisoning after eating a new food, for example, we tend to associate the taste and smell of the new food with feelings of illness. This is an example of a negative ‘associative memory’, and it can persist for months, even when we know that our sickness was not caused by the new food itself but by some foreign body that should not have been in the food. The same is true for positive associative memories.