 What are the fundamental capacities of insect brains? To date, little use has been made of insect memory experiments to reveal these capacities, in particular regarding reinforcement. For example, after experiencing an odor with a sugar reward, fruit flies (Drosophila melanogaster) approach that odor in a later test. All the known circuitry (Heisenberg, 2003; Perisse et al., 2013) of such learned search behavior suggests that this is because the odor has acquired positive value; that is, that the flies are expecting to find ‘something good’ in its vicinity (Heisenberg, 2003; Gerber and Hendel, 2006; Schleyer et al., 2011; Perisse et al., 2013). Likewise, Drosophila can associate an odor with an electric-shock punishment. This supports their learned escape in a later test because they may expect ‘something bad’ with the odor. In other words, the only feature of reinforcement processing that insects are granted is value. We show that larval Drosophila are in a defined sense richer than this in their mnemonic capacity: they also recall of what particular quality that good or bad experience was. Given the numerical simplicity of the larval brain, this is suggested to be a more basic property of brains than hitherto assumed. We introduce aspartic acid, a proteinogenic amino acid, as a novel quality of reward (Figure 1—figure supplement 2). Concentrations of aspartic acid and fructose are chosen such that their reward value is equal (Figure 1A). This allows us to study the larvae under test conditions that are of equal reward value but that either match or do not match the ‘quality’ of reward that has been employed during training. If the larvae merely searched for a reward of remembered value, learned search behavior should cease in both cases—because current strength matches remembered strength in both cases. If reward quality were the sole determinant for learned search, in contrast, learned search should be abolished only when test and training substrate match in quality, but should remain intact when quality does not match. If the larvae searched for a reward specified both by its value and by its quality, scores in the mismatch case should be partially abolished: in that case, the reward's value is as sought yet its quality is not. We find that learned search is fully abolished when the training and test reward match in both value and quality but remains partially intact (by 68%) if there is a mismatch in reward quality between training and test (Figure 1A,B). We conclude that after odor-fructose training the larvae approach the odor both in search of something ‘good’ (value) and in search of what is specifically fructose (quality of reward). Likewise, after odor-aspartic acid training, they search both for something ‘good’ and for aspartic acid. In other words, if during the test the larvae, for example, have sugar anyway but remember where aspartic acid can be found, they will still go for aspartic acid in addition. The mushroom bodies, a third-order ‘cortical’ (Tomer et al., 2010) brain region in insects, are canonically proposed to feature distinct regions harboring appetitive and aversive olfactory memory traces, respectively (Heisenberg, 2003; Perisse et al., 2013; see also Schleyer et al., 2011) (Figure 4A,B). Only recently has the possibility of different neuronal substrates underlying different qualities of reinforcement come to be considered. These studies have so far not yielded a double dissociation between different dopaminergic mushroom body input neurons for different qualities of reinforcement:For the aversive domain Galili et al. (2014) suggested that the set of dopaminergic mushroom body input neurons responsible for heat-punishment in adult Drosophila is nested within that for electric-shock punishment. Similarly, electric-shock punishment and punishment with the insect repellent DEET appear to be signaled towards the mushroom body by largely if not completely overlapping sets of dopamine neurons (Das et al., 2014).For the appetitive domain, a set of dopaminergic mushroom body input neurons (included in the 0104-Gal4 strain) that was previously found to be required for sugar-learning in adult Drosophila (Burke et al., 2012) turned out to be dispensable for water-reward learning (Lin et al., 2014). Whether in turn dopaminergic mushroom body input neurons included in the R48B04 strain, which were discovered by Lin et al. (2014) to be required for water-reward learning, are dispensable for sugar-learning remains to be tested.10.7554/eLife.04711.010Figure 4.Working hypotheses of reinforcement processing by value-only or by value and quality in larval Drosophila.(A) Simplified overview (based on e.g., Heisenberg, 2003; Perisse et al., 2013). Odors are coded combinatorially across the olfactory sensory neurons (OSN, blue). In the antennal lobe, these sensory neurons signal towards local interneurons (not shown) and projection neurons (PN, deep blue). Projection neurons have two target areas, the lateral horn (LH, orange) mediating innate approach, and the mushroom body (MB, yellow). Reinforcement signals (green and red for appetitive and aversive reinforcement, respectively) from the gustatory system reach the mushroom body, leading to associative memory traces in simultaneously activated mushroom body neurons. In the present analysis, this sketch focuses selectively on five broad classes of chemosensory behavior, namely innate odor approach, learned odor search and escape, as well as appetitive and aversive innate gustatory behavior. The boxed region is displayed in detail in (B-C). The break in the connection between mushroom body output and behavior is intended to acknowledge that mushroom body output is probably not in itself sufficient as a (pre-) motor signal but rather exerts a modulatory effect on weighting between behavioral options (Schleyer et al., 2013; Menzel, 2014; Aso et al., 2014). (B) Reinforcement processing by value (based on e.g., Heisenberg, 2003; Schleyer et al., 2011; Perisse et al., 2013): a reward neuron sums input from fructose and aspartic acid pathways and thus establishes a memory allowing for learned search for ‘good’. In a functionally separate compartment, a punishment neuron summing quinine and salt signals likewise establishes a memory trace for learned escape from ‘bad’. This scenario cannot account for quality-of-reinforcement memory. (C) Reinforcement processing by both value and quality: in addition to a common, value-specific appetitive memory, fructose and aspartic acid drive discrete reward signals leading to discrete memory traces in at least functionally distinct compartments of the Kenyon cells, which can be independently turned into learned search. For aversive memory, there may be only quality-specific punishment signals. This scenario is in accordance with the present data.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.04711.010 We used third-instar feeding-stage larvae from the Canton-Special wild-type strain, aged 5 days after egg laying. Flies were maintained on standard medium, in mass culture at 25°C, 60-70% relative humidity and a 12/12 hr light/dark cycle. Before each experiment, we removed a spoonful of food medium from a food vial, collected the desired number of larvae, briefly rinsed them in distilled water, and started the experiment.
The only property of reinforcement insects are commonly thought to learn about is its value. We show that larval Drosophila not only remember the value of reinforcement (How much?), but also its quality (What?). This is demonstrated both within the appetitive domain by using sugar vs amino acid as different reward qualities, and within the aversive domain by using bitter vs high-concentration salt as different qualities of punishment. From the available literature, such nuanced memories for the quality of reinforcement are unexpected and pose a challenge to present models of how insect memory is organized. Given that animals as simple as larval Drosophila, endowed with but 10,000 neurons, operate with both reinforcement value and quality, we suggest that both are fundamental aspects of mnemonic processing—in any brain.
Actions have consequences; positive consequences or rewards make it more likely that a behavior will be repeated, while negative consequences or punishments can stop a behavior occurring again. Neuroscientists commonly refer to such rewards and punishments as ‘reinforcement’.