 Neural circuits achieve an ongoing balance between flexibility and stability to enable plastic adaptations to environmental changes, while maintaining neuronal activity in a stable regime over extended timescales. The balance between stability and plasticity has rarely been addressed in the past due to the technical challenge of monitoring the activity of the same neurons over extended timescales (Lütcke et al., 2013). Recently, great efforts have been made to establish a system for the monitoring of neuronal activity at long timescales in the hippocampus of freely moving mice (Ziv et al., 2013). That study, performed by monitoring Ca2+ dynamics in thousands of CA1 cells over weeks through a miniature head-mounted microscope, revealed a remarkable degree of instability in the coding of space: only 25% of cells with place fields at one recording session exhibited the same properties 5 days later. Importantly, the diverse activity patterns at the single-neuron level gave rise to largely invariant spatial representations at the population level. Such results raise the question of whether inter-neuronal dynamics of spiking patterns stems from intrinsic variability of the hippocampal network and its constituent neurons, or whether they reflect extrinsic changes in hippocampal modulation by higher-order brain structures, adaptations to environmental changes, or subtle changes in animal behavior states. While the majority of homeostatic mechanisms have been studied following complete pharmacological blockade of spikes or AMPAR-mediated excitatory postsynaptic currents (EPSCs), we decided to examine long-term effects of neuromodulation on firing properties of the network. Specifically, we examined how use-dependent synaptic inhibition via G-protein-coupled receptors, a widespread mechanism of neuromodulation in the central nervous system (CNS), affects firing properties of the network over long timescales. As a perturbation, we chose a suppression of synaptic activity via widely expressed GABAB receptors (GABABRs) using a selective GABABR agonist, baclofen. GABABRs mediate presynaptic inhibition via inhibition of presynaptic calcium transients (Wu and Saggau, 1995; Laviv et al., 2010). Therefore, we first conducted experiments to determine the dose-response of baclofen at the level of presynaptic terminals utilizing FM1-43 dye in primary hippocampal cultures (Abramov et al., 2009). As GABABR-mediated inhibition is frequency-dependent (Varela et al., 1997; Kreitzer and Regehr, 2000; Ohliger-Frerking et al., 2003), we quantified the effects of baclofen for two types of input: low-frequency single spikes (30 stimuli at 1 Hz) and high-frequency spike bursts (30 stimuli delivered as 6 bursts; each burst contains 5 stimuli at 100 Hz), while maintaining the mean spiking rate constant at 1 Hz (Figure 1A). As expected, baclofen inhibits synaptic vesicle release, displaying preferential effects during low-frequency stimulation (Figure 1A). Quantitatively, IC50 for single spikes was ∼23-fold lower than for bursts (0.33 and 7.6 μM, respectively, Figure 1B). As a result, short-term facilitation was enhanced in a wide range of baclofen concentrations (0.01-10 μM, Figure 1C), indicating a conversion of synapses to a high-pass filter mode. Similar results were obtained using voltage-clamp experiments in acute hippocampal slices (Figure 1—figure supplement 1A,B).10.7554/eLife.04378.003Figure 1.Quantifying GABABR-mediated synaptic inhibition at synaptic, single neuron and network levels.(A) Representative ΔF images obtained by single (30 APs@0.2 Hz) and burst (30 APs@6 bursts, each burst contained 5 APs; inter-spike-interval, 10 ms; inter-burst-interval, 5 s) stimulations before and 10 min after 10 µM baclofen application. Scale bar: 5 μm. (B) Dose-response curve for the inhibitory presynaptic effect of baclofen during single vs burst stimulation patterns. Note, shift in the apparent IC50 from 0.33 µM in single stimulation (n = 7-12) to 7.6 µM for burst stimulation type (n = 8-10). (C) Short-term plasticity detected by FM method (calculated as Sburst/Ssingle) was in the range of 2.0 ± 0.01 to 2.3 ± 0.01 for baclofen concentrations in the range of 0.1-10 µM (n = 10-14) comparing to plasticity of control (1.4 ± 0.07, n = 13). (D) Top: image of dissociated hippocampal culture plated on MEA. Black circles at the end of the black lines are the recording electrodes. Scale bar: 200 µm. Bottom: representative trace of recording from one MEA channel. Spikes are detected based on a set threshold (blue dashed line). Inset is a zoom to one detected spike. Scale bars: 8 µV, 35 ms (6 ms for insert). (E) Example of spike sorting for one channel. Bottom: each waveform is represented in principal component space forming three distinct clusters. Top: mean waveforms for each cluster. Scale bar: 10 µV, 1 ms. (F) Representative raster plots of MEA recording before and immediately after application of 10 µM baclofen (***p < 0.0001, unpaired, two-tailed Student's t-test). (G) Acute effect of baclofen on firing rate at the single-unit level. Left: 1 µM baclofen (n = 5, 260 units). Right: 10 µM baclofen (n = 5, 314 units). (H) Acute effect of baclofen on the mean firing rate of the population (the same data as in G). Error bars represent SEM.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.04378.00310.7554/eLife.04378.004Figure 1—figure supplement 1.Properties of baclofen-induced changes in synaptic dynamics and single-unit firing in hippocampal neurons.(A) EPSC (−60 mV holding potential) traces evoked by low-frequency stimulation and by high-frequency spike bursts under control and 10 min after 10 µM baclofen application in acute hippocampal slices. Scale bars: Top: 20 pA, 20 ms; Bottom: 50 pA, 50 ms. (B) Baclofen increases short-term synaptic facilitation calculated based on EPSC measurements (1 µM—n = 5, p < 0.001; 10 µM—n = 4, p < 0.001) in acute hippocampal slices. (C) Distribution of per unit firing rate during 1 hr of control MEA recording (490 units). Firing rates are heavily skewed towards low frequencies. (D) Representative raster plots of MEA recording before and immediately after application of 1 µM baclofen. (E) Per unit correlation between baseline firing rates and the percent change in firing rates after 2 days of control recording showing significant negative correlation (Spearman r = −0.29, p < 0.001, 467 units). (F) Per unit correlation between baseline firing rates and the percent change in firing rates after 2 days in the presence of baclofen showing significant negative correlation (Spearman r = −0.47, p < 0.001, 311 units).DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.04378.004 How neural circuits maintain the balance between stability and plasticity is one of the most intriguing questions in neuroscience. Taking into account the highly dynamic and heterogeneous nature of individual synapses, ion channels, transmitters, and their receptors, understanding how individual neurons and neuronal populations maintain stable activity over long timescales or adjust their properties to changes in their external environment is an important and difficult challenge. Primary cultures of CA3-CA1 hippocampal neurons were prepared from newborn BALB/c mice on postnatal days 0-2, as described (Slutsky et al., 2004). The experiments were performed in 15-22 DIV cultures. All animal experiments were approved by the Tel Aviv University Committee on Animal Care. Cultures were plated on MEA plates containing 59 TiN recording and one internal reference electrodes (Multi Channel Systems [MCS], Germany). Electrodes are 30 µm in diameter and spaced 500 µm apart. Data were acquired using a MEA1060-Inv-BC-Standard amplifier (MCS) with frequency limits of 5000 Hz and a sampling rate of 10 kHz per electrode mounted on an Olympus IX71 inverted microscope. Recordings were carried out under constant 37°C and 5% CO2 conditions, identical to incubator conditions.
Neuronal circuits' ability to maintain the delicate balance between stability and flexibility in changing environments is critical for normal neuronal functioning. However, to what extent individual neurons and neuronal populations maintain internal firing properties remains largely unknown. In this study, we show that distributions of spontaneous population firing rates and synchrony are subject to accurate homeostatic control following increase of synaptic inhibition in cultured hippocampal networks. Reduction in firing rate triggered synaptic and intrinsic adaptive responses operating as global homeostatic mechanisms to maintain firing macro-stability, without achieving local homeostasis at the single-neuron level. Adaptive mechanisms, while stabilizing population firing properties, reduced short-term facilitation essential for synaptic discrimination of input patterns. Thus, invariant ongoing population dynamics emerge from intrinsically unstable activity patterns of individual neurons and synapses. The observed differences in the precision of homeostatic control at different spatial scales challenge cell-autonomous theory of network homeostasis and suggest the existence of network-wide regulation rules.
The human brain contains more than 80 billion neurons, which are organised into extensive networks. Changes in the strength of connections between neurons are thought to underlie learning and memory: neuronal networks must therefore be sufficiently stable to allow existing memories to be stored, while remaining flexible enough to enable the brain to form new memories.