 Gradual accumulation of evidence for or against different choices has been implicated in many types of decision-making, including value-based decisions (Basten et al., 2010; Milosavljevic et al., 2010; Cavanagh et al., 2011; Hunt et al., 2012; Solway and Botvinick, 2012), social decisions (Krajbich and Rangel, 2011), economic decisions (Gluth et al., 2012), gambling decisions (Busemeyer and Townsend, 1993), memory-based decisions (Ratcliff, 1978), numerical comparison decisions (Sigman and Dehaene, 2005), visual search decisions (Purcell et al., 2010; Heitz and Schall, 2012), and perceptual (Gold and Shadlen, 2007; Ratcliff et al., 2007; Mante et al., 2013) decisions. It is therefore considered a core decision-making process. Although neural correlates of evidence accumulation have been reported in several interconnected primate brain regions—such as PPC (Shadlen and Newsome, 2001; Roitman and Shadlen, 2002; Hunt et al., 2012), prefrontal cortex (Hunt et al., 2012) including frontal eye fields (FEF; Kim and Shadlen, 1999; Purcell et al., 2010; Ding and Gold, 2012; Heitz and Schall, 2012; Mante et al., 2013), striatum (Ding and Gold, 2010), and superior colliculus (Horwitz and Newsome, 1999; Ratcliff et al., 2007)—the specific roles of these different brain regions in decisions driven by accumulation of evidence have not yet been distinguished. We trained male Long-Evans rats (n = 14 rats) on the Poisson Clicks accumulation task (Figure 1, Brunton et al., 2013). On each trial of this task, illumination of the center LED indicated that the rat should place its nose in the center port and remain there while click trains with Poisson-generated inter-click-intervals were played from the left and right speakers. The rats learned to report which side had played the greater total number of clicks by nose-poking into the corresponding side port (Figure 2A). We refer to these trials as ‘accumulation trials’.10.7554/eLife.05457.004Figure 2.Behavioral evidence of accumulation.(A) Behavior as a function of total right minus total left clicks. For very easy trials (large click differences) performance is ≈90% correct. The circles (with very small error bars) are the mean ±95% binomial confidence intervals across accumulator trials from all rats 1 day before an infusion session (n = 47,580 trials across 14 rats). The thick line is the psychometric curve generated by the accumulator model fit to these trials. (B) The time-constant of accumulation as fit by the model for each rat in the experiment. The median (810 ms) is marked by a thin gray line. (C) Chronometric plot generated using the same data as in panel (A). The rats' performance increases with longer duration stimuli, consistent with an accumulation strategy. The circles and error bars are the mean ±95% binomial confidence intervals across trials on the easiest (blue), middle (purple) and hardest (magenta) thirds of trials defined by the absolute value of the ratios of left vs right click rates. The thick lines are the model generated chronometric curves. (D) Reverse correlation analyses showing that clicks throughout the stimulus were used in the rats' decision process, supporting the long accumulation time constants in (B). The thick dark red and green lines are the means ± std. err. across trials for where the rats went right and left. Thin light red and green lines are the model generated reverse correlation.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.05457.004Figure 2—figure supplement 1.9-parameter Accumulator Model (reproduced from Brunton et al., 2013).At each timepoint, the accumulator memory a (black trace) represents an estimate of the ‘Right’ vs ‘Left’ evidence accrued so far. At stimulus end, the model decides ‘Right’ if a > Þ, the decision boundary, and ‘Left’ otherwise, where Þ is a free parameter. Light grey traces indicate alternate runs with different instantiase.a The decision variable. Right ↑ (left ↓) pulses change the value of a by positive (negative) impulses of magnitude C.σi2 parameterizes noise in the initial value of a.σa2 a diffusion constant, parameterizing noise in a.σs2 parameterizes noise when adding the evidence from a Right or Left pulse: variance σs2 is added to the amplitude C of the evidence contributed by each click.λ parameterizes consistent drift in the memory a. In the ‘leaky’ or forgetful case (λ < 0, illustrated), drift is towards a = 0, and later pulses impact the decision more than earlier pulses. In the ‘unstable’ or impulsive case (λ > 0), drift is away from a = 0, and earlier pulses impact the decision more than later pulses. The memory's time constant τ = 1/λ.B the height of the ‘sticky’ decision bounds and parameterizes the amount of evidence necessary to commit to a decision.φ, τϕ parameterize sensory adaptation by defining the dynamics of C. Immediately after a click, the magnitude C is multiplied by φ. C then recovers towards an unadapted value of 1 with time constant τϕ. Facilitation is thus represented by ϕ > 1, while depression is represented by ϕ < 1 (inset).Þ the decision boundary. These properties are implemented by the following equations: if |a| ≥ B then da/dt = 0; else(1)da=σadW+(δt,tR·ηR·C−δt,tL·ηL·C)dt+λadt,whereδt,tR,L are delta functions at the times of the pulses.η are i.i.d. gaussian variables drawn from N(1,σs).dW is a white noise Wiener process.The initial condition a(t = 0) is drawn from the gaussian N(0,σi).Adaptation dynamics are given by:(2)dCdt=1−Cτϕ+(ϕ−1)C(δt,tR+δt,tL).In addition, a lapse rate parameterizes the fraction of trials on which a random response is made.Ideal performance (a = #right clicks − #left clicks) would be achieved by λ=0,B=∞,σa2=σs2=σi2=0,ϕ=1, Þ = 0.© 2013 AAAS. All Rights Reserved.2013AAASFigure 2—figure supplement 1 and legend text reproduced from Brunton BW, Botvinick MM, Brody CD. 2013. Rats and humans can optimally accumulate evidence for decision-making. Science 340, 95-98. doi:10.1126/science.1233912. Reprinted with permission.10.7554/eLife.05457.005Figure 2—figure supplement 2.Behavioral evidence of accumulation in individual rats.(A) Behavior as a function of total right minus total left clicks. For very easy trials (large click differences) performance is ≈90% correct. The thick line is the average performance of the 14 rats in the study, the thin gray lines are the performance of individual rats. (B) The time-constant of accumulation as fit by the model for each rat in the experiment. The median (810 ms) is marked by a thin gray line. (C) Chronometric plot showing that rats performance increases with longer duration stimuli, consistent with an accumulation strategy. The thin lines are the performance of individual rats (n = 14) on the easiest (blue), middle (purple) and hardest (magenta) thirds of trials defined by the absolute value of the ratios of left vs right click rates. The thick lines show the means across rats. (D) Reverse correlation analyses showing that clicks throughout the stimulus were used in the rats' decision process supporting the long accumulation time constants in (B). Thin light red and green lines are the reverse click rate correlation of individual rats (n = 14). The thick dark red and green lines are the means across rats.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.05457.005 In two-alternative forced choice tasks driven by accumulation of sensory evidence, such as the random dots task used with primates (Newsome et al., 1989) or the Poisson Clicks task used here with rats (Brunton et al., 2013), subjects gradually accumulate evidence over time; make a decision by categorizing the graded value of the accumulated evidence into a binary choice; use their decision to prepare a movement; and finally execute their decision-reporting motor act (these different components could potentially overlap). In primates, five recurrently interconnected brain regions have been associated with the overall process (superior colliculus, striatum, PPC, FEF, and dlPFC; Horwitz and Newsome, 1999; Kim and Shadlen, 1999; Shadlen and Newsome, 2001; Roitman and Shadlen, 2002; Ratcliff et al., 2007; Ding and Gold, 2010, 2012; Heitz and Schall, 2012; Mante et al., 2013), but despite some theoretical suggestions (Lo and Wang, 2006), the specific contributions of each brain region to the different aspects of the overall process, and the circuit logic of the network, remain unclear. Here we focused on the role of two rat cortical areas, posterior parietal cortex (PPC) and frontal orienting fields (FOF), that are considered critical for rodent decision-making (Erlich et al., 2011; Sul et al., 2011; Harvey et al., 2012; Carandini and Churchland, 2013), and that display neural correlates of gradually accumulating auditory evidence (Hanks et al., 2015). As in primates, the specific roles of each of these rat areas within the overall evidence accumulation and decision process remain undetermined. Animal use procedures were approved by the Princeton University Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee and carried out in accordance with National Institutes of Health standards. All subjects were male Long-Evans rats (Taconic, NY). Rats were placed on a restricted water schedule to motivate them to work for water reward. Rats were kept on a reversed 12 hr light-dark cycle and were trained in their dark cycle.
Numerous brain regions have been shown to have neural correlates of gradually accumulating evidence for decision-making, but the causal roles of these regions in decisions driven by accumulation of evidence have yet to be determined. Here, in rats performing an auditory evidence accumulation task, we inactivated the frontal orienting fields (FOF) and posterior parietal cortex (PPC), two rat cortical regions that have neural correlates of accumulating evidence and that have been proposed as central to decision-making. We used a detailed model of the decision process to analyze the effect of inactivations. Inactivation of the FOF induced substantial performance impairments that were quantitatively best described as an impairment in the output pathway of an evidence accumulator with a long integration time constant (>240 ms). In contrast, we found a minimal role for PPC in decisions guided by accumulating auditory evidence, even while finding a strong role for PPC in internally-guided decisions.
Imagine that you have to buy a computer before the start of the school year. You have a few options, such as a laptop or a desktop, each with its own advantages and disadvantages. A laptop is relatively light and portable, whereas a desktop has more memory and is cheaper. You will gradually accumulate evidence for and against each option, but before school starts, you have to make a decision.