 Social chemosignaling plays a large role in mammalian and particularly rodent behavior (Dulac and Torello, 2003; Keverne, 2005; Stowers and Marton, 2005; Brennan and Zufall, 2006; Kaur et al., 2014), and therefore mammals typically greet each other with careful olfactory investigation (Doty, 1986; Drea et al., 2002; Wesson, 2013). Similarly, there is mounting evidence for the role of social chemosignaling in ongoing human behavior (McClintock, 2000; Wysocki and Preti, 2004; de Groot et al., 2012). Human social chemosignals drive menstrual synchrony (Stern and McClintock, 1998), serve in mate selection (Jacob et al., 2002), convey fear (Chen et al., 2006; Zhou and Chen, 2009), drive pronounced hormonal (Preti et al., 2003; Wyart et al., 2007; Gelstein et al., 2011) and behavioral (Jacob et al., 2001a; Bensafi et al., 2003) modifications, and alter brain activity (Sobel et al., 1999; Jacob et al., 2001b; Savic et al., 2001, 2005; Lundström et al., 2006). Although there remains controversy on the statistics of menstrual synchrony (Schank, 2002), and on application of the term pheromone to instances of social chemosignaling in humans (Meredith, 2001; Wysocki and Preti, 2004; Doty, 2010), that humans emit odors that can influence behavior and perception in other humans is largely agreed upon. Unlike other mammals, however, humans do not engage in overt olfactory sampling and investigation of conspecifics. Thus, how do humans obtain the social chemosignals they so clearly process? Although some human cultures include explicit olfactory sampling in stereotypical greeting behaviors (Classen, 1992), and common behaviors such as hugging and kissing provide ample opportunity for covert olfactory sampling (Nicholson, 1984), human overt olfactory sampling and investigation of unfamiliar individuals is largely a taboo. Here, we asked whether human handshaking might serve as a subliminal mechanism for sampling social chemosignals. Handshaking is common across cultures and history (Firth, 1972; Schiffrin, 1974), yet its functional antecedents remain unclear, and the commonly cited notion of gesturing no weapons in the shaking hand has only limited scholarly support. Handshakes are sufficient for the transfer of various pathogens (Mela and Whitworth, 2014), and it is therefore likely that they are sufficient for the transfer of chemosignals as well. To test whether the general type of molecules implicated in chemosignaling can also be transferred by handshake, we used gas-chromatography mass-spectrometry to sample surgical nitrile gloves before and after a handshake with the bare hand of 10 individuals (5F, mean age = 34.1 plus-minus 5.6 years) (Figure 1A) (see ‘Materials and methods’). Examination of the resulting chromatograms (Figure 1B) revealed several peaks that were all effectively transferred through handshake alone. These included previously identified compounds of interest in human bodily secretions (Gallagher et al., 2008), such as squalene, which is a putative social chemosignaling component in several species including dogs (Apps et al., 2012) and rats (Achiraman et al., 2011); hexadecanoic acid, which is a putative social chemosignaling component in both mammals (Briand et al., 2004) and insects (Tang et al., 1989); and geranyl acetone, which is present in human secretions (Gallagher et al., 2008), but to date was considered a social chemosignaling component in insects alone (Zarbin et al., 2013) (Figure 1C). Each of these three compounds was transferred by handshake in all 10 of 10 subjects but not once in the control (all t[9] > 3.9, all p < 0.003). Use of cosmetics beyond hand-soap by these 10 subjects was minimal (2 subjects), and there was overlap in only one brand of hand-soap. We therefore submitted this hand-soap to GCMS analysis as well, and did not detect any traces of the three above components. Thus, we conclude that these were likely endogenous skin-bound molecules. These results do not imply that these molecules are necessarily social chemosignaling components in humans, but they do demonstrate that the act of handshaking is sufficient to transfer molecules of the type that are likely relevant to mammalian social chemosignaling.10.7554/eLife.05154.003Figure 1.Handshakes can transfer chemosignaling components.(A) A representative image of our sampling method using a nitirle glove during handshake. (B) An example chromatogram from one experiment. Note that the ‘clean’ condition is a glove worn by the same hand, but not shaken. This controls for potential contamination from the glove-wearing hand. Most unmarked peaks in the chromatogram that are present in both the clean and the shaken are PDMS artifacts—various siloxane compounds that come from either the twister used to sample the gloves or the GC column. Moreover, some peaks that are present in this example were not present across subjects. The only three peaks that were present following all shakes but never once in control are those we describe in the following panel. (C) Summated data from 10 individuals (each an average of three shakes) demonstrating three compounds of interest in chemosignaling (Gallagher et al., 2008) that were effectively transferred by handshaking in all instances and never once in control. Error bars are standard error, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.05154.003 Whereas typical behavioral studies involve an ongoing task, here we observed subjects ‘doing nothing’ before and after a greeting event. A striking aspect of these observations was the extent of apparent olfactory self-exploration: human subjects repeatedly investigated their own hands, and this was often accompanied by overt sniffing (see online Video 1 and Video 2). Our analyses reveal that such sniffing of the right shaking hand significantly increased selectively following handshakes with same gender individuals, and we speculate that this reflects chemo-investigation of conspecifics. Note that sniffing of the right shaking hand also persisted following cross-gender handshakes, yet here it dropped to a level significantly below baseline. Thus, this finding implies that humans are not only passively exposed to social chemosignals, but rather actively search for them. This was further evident in the tainting experiment where putative chemosignals and an ordinary perfume drove opposite effects. However, whereas previous studies found that AND and EST can bias perceptions in a gender-specific manner (Savic et al., 2001; Zhou et al., 2014), here AND and EST drove similar effects within gender that were opposite to that of a standard perfume. Whether the common response profile to AND and EST observed in the current setting has any bearing on their consideration as chemosignals is unlikely. Moreover, this issue is off-topic of the current study, where the important aspect is that one type of unnoticed odor taint decreased the behavior (AND and EST) yet a different type of unnoticed odor taint (perfume) did not. In other words, the behavior we measured was indeed influenced by unnoticed odor. All 281 subjects signed informed consent to procedures approved by the Wolfson Hospital Helsinki Committee. Moreover, after each experiment, subjects were offered the right to destroy the photographic data, or in turn provide specific consent for its use in research and/or publication. All subjects that appear in the accompanying videos provided written informed consent to have their video shown in scientific publications. Moreover, given the possibility of off-site reproduction by others, we obscured the facial features of subjects who consented to have their video shown in scientific publication but did not explicitly consent to have their video shown in non-scientific media. All experiments were conducted in stainless-steel coated odorant non-adherent rooms subserved by high throughput HEPA and carbon filtration that were specially designed for human olfaction experiments. For the initial measurement of possible chemosignal transfer by handshake (Figure 1) we measured three handshakes, one on each of three consecutive days, by each of the 10 participants (i.e., total 30 handshakes). Because we wanted to measure near-natural conditions, we did not instruct subjects to wash their hands before measurement. Instead, we collected data on all use of cosmetics. One subject (F) used hand cream and one subject (M) used facial cream. Other than one brand of hand-soap used by several subjects, there was no overlap in use of any cosmetic across the 10 subjects. We therefore conducted GCMS analysis of this soap, and did not find traces of any of the three components that occurred consistently across subjects. Thus, any of these components that transfer from handshake alone in all subjects cannot be attributed to a cosmetic source.
Social chemosignaling is a part of human behavior, but how chemosignals transfer from one individual to another is unknown. In turn, humans greet each other with handshakes, but the functional antecedents of this behavior remain unclear. To ask whether handshakes are used to sample conspecific social chemosignals, we covertly filmed 271 subjects within a structured greeting event either with or without a handshake. We found that humans often sniff their own hands, and selectively increase this behavior after handshake. After handshakes within gender, subjects increased sniffing of their own right shaking hand by more than 100%. In contrast, after handshakes across gender, subjects increased sniffing of their own left non-shaking hand by more than 100%. Tainting participants with unnoticed odors significantly altered the effects, thus verifying their olfactory nature. Thus, handshaking may functionally serve active yet subliminal social chemosignaling, which likely plays a large role in ongoing human behavior.
Animals often sniff each other as a form of greeting to communicate with each other through chemical signals in their body odors. However, in humans this form of behavior is considered taboo, especially between strangers.