 Successful social interactions require understanding of peer dispositions, desires, beliefs and intentions. A major step in developing this theory of (the other one's) mind (TOM) is our ability to shift our attention to the same location and/or object the other one is interested in, that is to establish joint attention (Baron-Cohen, 1995). By associating our own object-related aspirations and intentions with the object, we may arrive at a viable theory of the other one's mind. In order to shift our attention to the right place or object, we rely on spatial information provided by peer body such as the direction of a pointing finger or the orientation of the head and the shoulder girdle. In case of humans, arguably the most important bodily cue, reliably providing extremely precise spatial information (Bock et al., 2008), is peer eye gaze, a cue that can be easily retrieved even from quite some distance because of the high contrast border between the eye's dark center and periphery. The eyes of macaque monkeys and many other nonhuman primates (NHP) lack comparable contrasts (Kobayashi and Kohshima, 1997), which is why eye gaze seems to be of little importance in this group (Lorincz et al., 1999). While monkeys seem to lack a full-fledged TOM (Anderson et al., 1996) (Flombaum and Santos, 2005 for a different view), they are nevertheless able to establish joint attention with conspecifics, largely relying on head gaze, that is the orientation of peer head (=face). Importantly, not only human but also monkey gaze following seems to be geometric: the observer identifies peer focus of attention by following his/her gaze towards the object of interest (Emery et al., 1997; Emery, 2000). In other words, rather than simply using the directional information provided by a gaze cue to shift attention out from the center until an object of potential interest is encountered, geometrical gaze following implies that a gaze vector is defined which is used to search for the object of interest (Butterworth and Jarrett, 1991). Another important feature shared by the gaze following of monkeys and man is the dependence on social context. For instance, human observers tend to prefer gaze cues of those whom they feel close to Liuzza et al. (2011), while monkeys are particularly eager to follow the gaze of higher status conspecifics (Shepherd et al., 2006). The availability of geometric gaze following in monkeys and man and the modulatory influence of context supports the idea that monkey and human gaze following may actually be closely related, sharing homologous substrates, although the choice of the relevant social cue—eye vs head—differs. In any case, perceiving peer eye or head gaze and converting it into a gaze vector is only a first step in a sequence of demanding computations that ultimately lead to the establishment of joint attention. This is a consequence of the fact that objects of interest may lie anywhere relative to the demonstrator and the observer. Only if the object were midway between the two, joint attention could be established by simply mirroring the demonstrator's gaze vector. However, as this specific location will be an exception rather than the rule, the object position will have to be transformed from a demonstrator-centered frame of reference (FOR) into an observer-centered FOR before a successful shift of attention can be programmed. In the first experiment, the two monkey subjects ('observers') were exposed to the portraits of fpur monkey individuals turning their head at one out of four different targets arranged along the horizontal. The two observers were instructed to either use head gaze orientation to identify the spatial target (gaze following) or, alternatively, to exploit learned associations between the identity of the seen faces and the individual targets (identity-matching condition) while ignoring head gaze (Figure 1A,B). The target choice was indicated by precise saccades to one of the four targets (Figure 1C). In other words, the two conditions were the same in terms of the visual information provided by the presented portraits as well as the motor behavior the visual stimuli prompted. However, they differed with regard to the facial cues used to prompt shifts of attention. We compared the accuracy of behavioral responses as measured by the percentages of correct choices for the gaze following and the identity-matching task, using data sets underlying the fMRI analysis. The accuracy levels were not significantly different in the two tasks (Figure 1D). Saccade latencies were also not different (Figure 1E).10.7554/eLife.03222.003Figure 1.Experimental paradigm and behavioral results (‘gaze following’ paradigm).(A) Stimuli. 16 portraits used in the gaze following and identity matching tasks, arranged by the same identity (rows) or head orientations (columns, demonstrator's head orientation eccentricity indicated in brackets). The arrows point to the correct target dot in gaze following (red) and identity matching task (green). Arrows and the scale with the eccentricity of the target as seen by the observer were not visible during the experiment. Portraits and target bar were presented on an otherwise black background (here shown as gray for better visualization). (B) Sequence of events. Exemplary gaze following (left) and identity matching (right) trials. (C) Exemplary horizontal eye movements sampled during a typical fMRI run. The gray shaded horizontal area around 0° indicates the limits (plus-minus2°) of the fixation window, the red areas indicate gaze following blocks and the green ones identity matching blocks. White areas outline the 'fixation-only' blocks. (D) Median percentages of correct answers in gaze following (red) and identity matching blocks (green), pooled separately for each observer (M1: 138 blocks; M2: 150 blocks) in ‘gaze following’ paradigm. Error bars represent 95% confidence intervals. The difference was not significant (ns, Wilcoxon signed rank test: p=0.67 [M1], p=0.43 [M2]). Dashed line indicates the chance level in each task (25%). (E) Mean reaction times in gaze following (red) and identity matching blocks (green), pooled separately for the two observers (M1:138 blocks; M2: 150 blocks) in ‘gaze following’ paradigm. Error bars represent standard errors. The difference was not significant (ns, paired samples t test: p=0.08 [M1]; p=0.22 [M2]).DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.03222.003 We asked monkeys to use head gaze orientation of a portrayed conspecific to identify the spatial target the portrayed monkey was looking at, and to overtly shift attention to the same target. If cued by an alternative instruction, the same subjects exploited learned association between portrait identities and specific target locations to shift attention while ignoring gaze. Two rhesus monkeys (Macaca mulatta): monkey M1 (6 years, 8 kg); monkey M2 (8 years, 11 kg) were implanted with three cf-PEEK (carbon-fiber-enforced polyetheretherketone) tripods, each attached to the skull with six ceramic screws (Thomas Recording). Surgeries were carried out under combination anesthesia with isoflurane and remifentanyl with monitoring of all relevant vital parameters (body temperature, CO2, blood oxygen saturation, blood pressure, ECG). After surgery, monkeys were supplied with opioid analgesics (buprenorphin) until they fully recovered. Every effort was made to minimize discomfort and suffering. The study was performed in strict accordance with the recommendations in the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals of the National Institutes of Health. All of the animals were handled according to the guidelines of the German law regulating the usage of experimental animals and the protocols approved by the local institution in charge of experiments using animals (Regierungspraesidium Tuebingen, Abteilung Tierschutz, permit-number N1/08).
Primates use gaze cues to follow peer gaze to an object of joint attention. Gaze following of monkeys is largely determined by head or face orientation. We used fMRI in rhesus monkeys to identify brain regions underlying head gaze following and to assess their relationship to the ‘face patch’ system, the latter being the likely source of information on face orientation. We trained monkeys to locate targets by either following head gaze or using a learned association of face identity with the same targets. Head gaze following activated a distinct region in the posterior STS, close to-albeit not overlapping with-the medial face patch delineated by passive viewing of faces. This ‘gaze following patch’ may be the substrate of the geometrical calculations needed to translate information on head orientation from the face patches into precise shifts of attention, taking the spatial relationship of the two interacting agents into account.
Gaze following—working out where someone else is looking, and then switching your attention to that position—is an important part of social behavior and learning. Additionally, it is thought to be an important step towards recognizing that others have a mind of their own. Humans mostly use eye position to work out the ‘gaze direction’ of someone else, whereas non-human primates rely instead on the orientation of the face. However, the neural circuits that control gaze following are thought to be similar in both.