 The mechanisms of memory formation have been the subject of considerable study (Morris et al., 1988; Kandel, 2001). Much evidence points to Hebbian plasticity as the neural mechanism for the association of two co-occurring stimuli (Bliss and Collingridge, 1993; Morris, 2003). However, this mechanism alone is not sufficient to account for learning under conditions where the two stimuli are separated in time by more than 100 ms (Levy and Steward, 1983), as has been commonly observed (Solomon et al., 1986; Baeg et al., 2003). Using two-photon calcium imaging, we monitored the activity of large numbers of neurons in area CA1 of the dorsal hippocampus in awake, head-fixed mice while they were trained on a trace eyeblink conditioning task (Figure 1A).10.7554/eLife.01982.003Figure 1.Behavior: trace eye-blink conditioning of mice.(A) Cartoon schematic of experimental system. Two-photon calcium imaging was carried out in area CA1 of the dorsal hippocampus in a head-fixed mouse which underwent trace eyeblink conditioning. A speaker (yellow, b) was used for tone stimulus delivery, while a nozzle (red, a) directed the aversive air-puff. A magnetometer (black, c) was used to monitor eyelid position in order to detect blinks. Scale bars at the bottom of the figure indicate times of stimulus delivery (yellow and red bars for tone [350 ms long] and puff [100 ms long] respectively, along with the gap in-between [250 ms]) as well as data acquisition (green bar, 15 s long) during a single trial. (B) Sample eyelid position signal traces from a mouse undergoing trace eyeblink conditioning. The color scale indicates eyelid position in arbitrary units, with high values indicating eyelid closure (blink). This mouse started reproducibly showing significant blinks before the air-puff (e.g., green arrow) mid-way through the session. (C and D) Eyelid position traces in response to pre-training tone presentation (C), and both tone and puff stimuli during trace eye-blink conditioning (D). Gray traces are from individual trials and black traces are averages across trials. Yellow and red bars at the bottom indicate times of delivery of tone and air-puff respectively. (E) Distributions of performance scores for trace (blue) and pseudo (green) conditioned mice. (F) Average performance score, which is the ratio of tone evoked significant blink (CR) rates to spontaneous blink rates, is plotted for all trace conditioned mice (blue) and pseudo-conditioned mice (green). Error bars indicate SEM. * indicates p<0.05. (G) Learning curves (gray lines) for the nine mice that learned the association to criterion. The learning trial identified for each mouse is marked with a red circle. The black curve shows average performance across mice. The vertical, dotted line indicates the mean learning trial across mice (trial 26). Each learning curve was obtained by first obtaining a binary list of significant response trials for each mouse, and then using a previously described expectation maximization algorithm to calculate the CR probability on each trial, for individual mice. The horizontal, red line indicates the probability of CRs by chance.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.01982.003 We showed that, during trace eyeblink conditioning, groups of area CA1 neurons progressively began to fire in sequences that spanned the interval from tone onset to 200 ms after the puff (figures 2D, 3D,E). This phenomenon became prominent at the same trial in the session at which mice learned the association (Figure 1G). The emergence of activity sequences and learning were closely preceded by a transient increase in noise-correlations, and was accompanied by modifications to spatially organized clustering of correlated neurons (Figure 4A,B, 5F, 6A-C). As has been seen before in the context of place cells, we found that neurons related to sequential activity were not spatially organized within the hippocampus (Dombeck et al., 2010; Figure 3—figure supplement 1F,G). All experimental procedures were approved by the National Centre for Biological Sciences Institutional Animal Ethics Committee (Protocol number USB-19-1/2011), in accordance with the guidelines of the Government of India (animal facility CPCSEA registration number 109/1999/CPCSEA) and equivalent guidelines of the Society for Neuroscience. All recordings and behavioral experiments were carried out on male, 30 to 45 day old C57BL/6 mice. Data acquired from a total of 35 mice is included here. A total of 18 mice were trace conditioned, and 17 mice pseudo-conditioned. Of the 18 trace conditioned mice, 9 learned the task to criterion and the other 9 failed to learn. Imaging data was acquired for 14 of the trace conditioned mice. Of these, 6 were learners and 8 were non-learners. Of the 17 pseudo-conditioned mice, imaging data was acquired for 6 mice (Figure 2—figure supplement 1B).
Animals can learn causal relationships between pairs of stimuli separated in time and this ability depends on the hippocampus. Such learning is believed to emerge from alterations in network connectivity, but large-scale connectivity is difficult to measure directly, especially during learning. Here, we show that area CA1 cells converge to time-locked firing sequences that bridge the two stimuli paired during training, and this phenomenon is coupled to a reorganization of network correlations. Using two-photon calcium imaging of mouse hippocampal neurons we find that co-time-tuned neurons exhibit enhanced spontaneous activity correlations that increase just prior to learning. While time-tuned cells are not spatially organized, spontaneously correlated cells do fall into distinct spatial clusters that change as a result of learning. We propose that the spatial re-organization of correlation clusters reflects global network connectivity changes that are responsible for the emergence of the sequentially-timed activity of cell-groups underlying the learned behavior.
Ivan Pavlov famously discovered that dogs would salivate upon hearing a bell that had previously been used to signal food, even when there was no food present. This ability to connect events that occur close together in time is known as associative learning. But how is it supported within the brain?