 In most sensory systems, neurons encode sensory stimuli by responding selectively to a particular range of stimulus parameters, as typically characterized by tuning curves (Dayan and Abbott, 2001). In turn, the pattern of activation across a population of such neurons provides information about the most likely stimulus that may have occurred (Dayan and Abbott, 2001). Whether or not a sensory neuron contributes to perceptual decisions generally depends on whether that neuron is selective to the stimulus dimensions relevant to the task at hand, and how much weight is given to the activity of that neuron in population decoding. One method for assessing the potential contribution of a sensory neuron to perception involves measuring the trial-by-trial covariation between neural activity and perceptual decisions, as typically quantified by computing the choice probability (CP) (Britten et al., 1996; Dodd et al., 2001; Uka and DeAngelis, 2004; Purushothaman and Bradley, 2005; Gu et al., 2007, 2008; Nienborg and Cumming, 2009, 2010; Liu et al., 2013). We explore how selective decoding and correlated noise contribute to choice probabilities (CPs) in three stages. First, we consider a population of hypothetical neurons that represent a stimulus feature, such as heading, based on a single sensory modality (e.g. visual motion). Second, we extend this simplified population model to the multisensory case, in which a second sensory cue (e.g., vestibular) also provides information about the stimulus feature, and we consider the predictions that arise for choice probabilities in neurons with mismatched tuning for the two sensory modalities (opposite cells). Finally, we apply our analyses to models that are based more closely on data from neurons in area MSTd, and we compare the predictions of selective decoding and pure correlation models with the animals' behavior, as well as the structure of correlated noise among neurons. We explored the relative roles of correlated noise and selective decoding in generating the pattern of CPs observed across a population of multisensory neurons. While it is well accepted that correlated noise is necessary to observe CPs in large populations of cortical neurons (Nienborg and Cumming, 2010; Cohen and Kohn, 2011; Nienborg et al., 2012), a critical question is whether CPs can also reflect selective decoding of neural responses. Both the pure-correlation model and the selective decoding model could account for the peculiar finding that opposite cells show CPs that are systematically >0.5 in the vestibular condition and <0.5 in the visual condition (Gu et al., 2008; Chen et al., 2013). However, three main features of our findings favor the selective decoding model over the pure correlation model. First, the pure correlation model predicts a pattern of correlated noise that is inconsistent with experimental data from area MSTd, whereas correlated noise in the selective decoding model depends on congruency of tuning in a manner that is similar to that exhibited by pairs of MSTd neurons. Second, the pure correlation model predicts that CPs for opposite cells in the combined condition should be bimodally distributed, which is inconsistent with data from MSTd and with a broad range of predictions of the selective decoding model. Third, with modest weight given to opposite cells, the selective decoding model predicts a pattern of psychophysical sensitivity across stimulus conditions that closely matches the behavioral data from monkeys. Together our findings indicate that, although correlated noise is essential to observe CPs in large neural populations, selective decoding can play important roles in shaping patterns of CPs and behavioral performance. Two populations of MSTd-like neurons were simulated with cosine heading tuning:(1)Firing_meank,i(θ)=A×(cos((θ+Pk,i)×π/180)+1),where k is the stimulus condition (visual, vestibular), i indexes a particular neuron, and θ denotes heading direction within the horizontal plane [−180° +180°]. To simulate the heading discrimination task (Gu et al., 2007, 2008), we used a small range of headings [θ = plus-minus8°, plus-minus4°, plus-minus2°, plus-minus1°, plus-minus0.5°, plus-minus0.25°, plus-minus0.1° and 0°] around straight ahead. Pk,i denotes the heading preference of each neuron, which is either +90° (rightward) or −90° (leftward) for the purposes of simulating heading discrimination, given that most neurons have monotonic tuning over this range (Gu et al., 2008). Each model population contains equal numbers of units with leftward and rightward heading preferences. A is a scaling factor to adjust the peak response amplitude, and was arbitrarily set to be 100 such that the peak response of each neuron is 200 spikes/s and the minimum response is 0 spike/s.
Trial by trial covariations between neural activity and perceptual decisions (quantified by choice Probability, CP) have been used to probe the contribution of sensory neurons to perceptual decisions. CPs are thought to be determined by both selective decoding of neural activity and by the structure of correlated noise among neurons, but the respective roles of these factors in creating CPs have been controversial. We used biologically-constrained simulations to explore this issue, taking advantage of a peculiar pattern of CPs exhibited by multisensory neurons in area MSTd that represent self-motion. Although models that relied on correlated noise or selective decoding could both account for the peculiar pattern of CPs, predictions of the selective decoding model were substantially more consistent with various features of the neural and behavioral data. While correlated noise is essential to observe CPs, our findings suggest that selective decoding of neuronal signals also plays important roles.
Even the simplest tasks require the brain to process vast amounts of information. To take a step forward, for example, the brain must process information about the orientation of the animal's body and what the animal is seeing, hearing and feeling in order to determine whether any obstacles stand in the way. The brain must integrate all this information to make decisions about how to proceed. And once a decision is made, the brain must send signals via the nervous system to the muscles to physically move the foot forward.