 Early neuronal development consists of a stereotypic progression of events involving neurite extension, axonal polarization and growth, dendritic arborization, and synaptic formation (Urbanska et al., 2008; Barnes and Polleux, 2009; Caceres et al., 2012). Dendrites are the main site of information input into neurons. The architecture of the dendritic tree and the targeting of dendrites into appropriate territories critically shape the input properties of neurons and are therefore of profound importance for the establishment of neuronal networks (London and Hausser, 2005; Mumm et al., 2006; Parrish et al., 2007; Spruston, 2008). The most relevant synaptic specialization of dendrites is dendritic spines. These actin-rich, structurally plastic protrusions represent the major sites of excitatory synaptic contact (Bonhoeffer and Yuste, 2002; Hering and Sheng, 2001). The development of both, dendrites and spines, represents a multistep process influenced by external signals and intrinsic genetic programs (Jan and Jan, 2003; Wong and Ghosh, 2002). Emerging data suggest that specific miRNAs exert critical regulatory functions during neuronal differentiation by controlling developmental gene expression programs driving dendritic and spine maturation (Schratt et al., 2006; Fiore et al., 2009; Parrish et al., 2009; Magill et al., 2010). Depending on the configuration of the binding sites, two sponge designs have been described: fully complementary (FC) sponges, which function by both sequestering miRNA and promoting miRNA degradation (Ameres et al., 2010); and bulged (Bg) sponge variants, which carry mismatches that prevent base-pairing with the miRNA at positions 9–12, thereby avoiding AGO2-mediated decay of the sponge (Ebert et al., 2007) (Figure 1—figure supplement 1). The results of this study define a key role for miR-9 during postmitotic differentiation of neurons. In all experiments, mice were housed under standard laboratory conditions (22 plus-minus 1°C, 55 plus-minus 5% humidity) with food and water ad libitum. For staging of embryos, noon on the day of the appearance of a vaginal plug was treated as embryonic day 0.5 (E0.5), and the day of birth was considered postnatal day 0 (P0). Animals were handled according to the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals of Government of Bavaria, Germany.
MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are conserved noncoding RNAs that function as posttranscriptional regulators of gene expression. miR-9 is one of the most abundant miRNAs in the brain. Although the function of miR-9 has been well characterized in neural progenitors, its role in dendritic and synaptic development remains largely unknown. In order to target miR-9 in vivo, we developed a transgenic miRNA sponge mouse line allowing conditional inactivation of the miR-9 family in a spatio-temporal-controlled manner. Using this novel approach, we found that miR-9 controls dendritic growth and synaptic transmission in vivo. Furthermore, we demonstrate that miR-9-mediated downregulation of the transcriptional repressor REST is essential for proper dendritic growth.
Messages are sent back and forth in our brains by cells called neurons that connect to each other in complex networks. Neurons develop from stem cells in a complicated process that involves a number of different stages. In one of the final stages, tree-like structures called dendrites emerge from the neurons and connect with neighboring neurons via special junctions called synapses.