 The network of brain regions that encode both the affective and sensory aspects of the pain experience have been well described in the adult (Apkarian et al., 2005; Tracey and Mantyh, 2007). It is not known which cortical and subcortical brain structures are activated following noxious events in infants. Early evidence demonstrated that infants exhibited reflex responses and concluded that pain was not processed at the level of the cortex (Rodkey and Pillai Riddell, 2013). This, coupled with an infant's inability to describe their pain experience verbally, led to extreme controversy regarding whether an infant has the ability to experience the unpleasant affective components of pain (Rodkey and Pillai Riddell, 2013). Consequently, infants have received poor pain management, exemplified during the 1980s by surgery being routinely performed using neuromuscular blocks without provision of adequate analgesia (Anand and Hickey, 1987). More recent research has primarily focussed on behavioural and physiological measures, which has led to the development of a number of infant pain assessment tools (Duhn and Medves, 2004). However, the lack of sensitivity and specificity of these measures means the trend to undertreat pain remains in clinical practice (Carbajal et al., 2008), despite concerted efforts to improve the management of pain in this population (Anand and International Evidence-Based Group for Neonatal Pain, 2001). For example, it is remarkable that current UK NHS guidelines for ankyloglossia (tongue tie) surgery state that ‘in small babies, being cuddled and fed are more important than painkillers’ (NHS Choices, 2015). Indeed, a recent review of neonatal pain management practice in intensive care highlighted that although infants experience an average of 11 painful procedures per day, 60% of the population did not receive any pharmacological analgesia (Roofthooft et al., 2014). Adult participants reported increased pain with increasing stimulus intensity (r = 0.48; p < 0.0001), and most frequently described the pain as pricking (n = 8 of 10) and sharp (n = 6 of 10). In infants, application of the stimuli evoked visible withdrawal of the stimulated leg, which could be observed at all stimulus intensities, whereas in adults, reflex withdrawal of the leg or foot was not observed at any stimulus intensity. While low threshold stimuli can also evoke reflex withdrawal in infants (Cornelissen et al., 2013), this observation confirms that the stimuli applied in this study were detected by the peripheral nervous system and transmitted to the central nervous system. Although noxious stimulation can elicit reflex limb withdrawal in adults, supraspinal modulation of the input means this activity is often suppressed in experimental studies. 10 healthy adults (mean age = 28.3 years; range: 23-36) and 10 healthy term-born infants (mean gestational age at time of study = 40.6 weeks; range: 38.6-42.7) participated in the study. Adult participants were members of staff or postgraduate students at The University of Oxford, and infants were recruited from the Maternity Unit at the John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford. At the time of study all infants were less than 7 days old (mean postnatal age = 3 days; range: 1-6). Infant participants were eligible for inclusion in the study if they were healthy, had no history of neurological problems, born after 37 weeks gestation, self-ventilating in air and clinically stable at the time of study.
Limited understanding of infant pain has led to its lack of recognition in clinical practice. While the network of brain regions that encode the affective and sensory aspects of adult pain are well described, the brain structures involved in infant nociceptive processing are less well known, meaning little can be inferred about the nature of the infant pain experience. Using fMRI we identified the network of brain regions that are active following acute noxious stimulation in newborn infants, and compared the activity to that observed in adults. Significant infant brain activity was observed in 18 of the 20 active adult brain regions but not in the infant amygdala or orbitofrontal cortex. Brain regions that encode sensory and affective components of pain are active in infants, suggesting that the infant pain experience closely resembles that seen in adults. This highlights the importance of developing effective pain management strategies in this vulnerable population.
Doctors long believed that infants do not feel pain the way that older children and adults do. Instead, they believed that the infants' responses to discomfort were reflexes. Based on these beliefs, it was a routine practice to perform surgery on infants without suitable pain relief up until the late 1980s. Even now, infants may receive less than ideal pain relief. For example, a review found that although newborns in intensive care units undergo 11 painful procedures per day on average, more than half of the babies received no pain medications. Some guidelines continue to emphasize that for infants cuddling and feeding are more important sources of comfort than pain-relieving drugs.