 Accurate functional connectivity and sensory perception require proper development of the neuronal dendritic field, which ultimately determines the (sensory) input a specific neuron can receive and detect. Thus, coordinated dendrite growth and patterning is important for establishing the often complex, but highly stereotyped organization of receptive fields. Two of the organizing principles in dendrite development are self-avoidance and tiling (Grueber and Sagasti, 2010; Jan and Jan, 2010; Zipursky and Sanes, 2010). While self-avoidance describes the phenomenon of recognition and repulsion of isoneuronal dendritic branches, tiling refers to the complete yet non-redundant coverage of a receptive field by neighboring neurons of the same type. Both phenomena have been described in different systems across species including the mouse, zebrafish, medicinal leech, Caenorhabditis elegans, and Drosophila melanogaster. To identify cell surface receptors mediating dendrite development of C4da neurons we used an in vivo RNAi screening approach. We focused on functionally defined classes of proteins containing conserved extracellular domains, including IgSFs and receptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs). To this end we expressed available RNAi transgenes specifically in the embryonic/larval PNS (21-7-Gal4) together with a C4da neuron specific reporter line (ppk-CD4-tdTomato, Han et al., 2012). We also utilized a UAS-Dcr2 transgene to enhance RNAi efficiency (Dietzl et al., 2007). Using this approach, we screened approximately 400 RNAi lines targeting IgSFs and RTKs and found that knockdown of Ret with two independent lines led to strong dendrite defects in C4da neurons (Figure 1A). Knockdown of Ret resulted in abnormal C4da dendrite patterning with crossing of dendritic branches and incomplete coverage of their receptive field. We did not observe defects in other classes of da neurons (Figure 1—figure supplement 1 and data not shown) suggesting that Ret plays a specific role in C4da neuron dendrite morphogenesis.10.7554/eLife.05491.003Figure 1.In vivo RNAi knockdown of Ret causes C4da neuron dendrite pattering defects.(A) RetRNAi transgenes together with Dcr2 were driven by Gal421–7 and C4da neuron morphology was visualized with a specific fluorescent reporter (ppk-CD4-tdTomato). Confocal live images of control animals (ctl) show wildtype dendrite morphology, while expression of either of two independent Ret-RNAi transgenes led to severely disorganized dendrites with incomplete receptive field coverage. (B) A Gal4 insertion in the Ret genomic locus drives CD8-GFP expression in C4da neurons indicating the presence of Ret. Scale bar 50 μm. (C–E) Immunohistochemical analysis of Ret expression in third instar larvae of wildtype (C and D) and Ret deficient animals (E). Overlays with GFP expressing C4da neurons (ppk-Gal4 > CD4-tdGFP) show that specific anti-Ret signal could be detected throughout the C4da dendritic arbor (C). Resliced portions (in Z direction) of primary (C′) and terminal (C′′) C4da dendrites show that Ret strongly labels the basal side of dendrites facing the ECM as shown in the schematic drawing. (D) Ret was also present in distal terminal dendrites of the dorsal field of C4da neurons (D′ and D′′, scale bar 20 μm, 10 μm for insets). Residual Ret signal was detected in the C4da neuron soma in Ret mutant animals but not in dendrites (E inset). Arrows indicate non-specific antibody signal present in wildtype and Ret mutant samples. Scale bar 20 μm. (F) Quantitative analysis of Ret immunoreactivity in C4da somata of wildtype and Ret mutant samples showing the signal over background (ΔF/F, mean plus-minus SD, n = 5, p < 0.001, Student's two-tailed t-test).DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.05491.00310.7554/eLife.05491.004Figure 1—figure supplement 1.Class I da neurons do not display obvious morphological defects in Ret mutant animals.RetC168 homozygous third instar larvae display no obvious phenotype in class I da neuron morphology visualized by 2-21-Gal4 > CD8-GFP. Scale bar 50 μm.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.05491.00410.7554/eLife.05491.005Figure 1—figure supplement 2.phospho-Ret levels are reduced in Ret mutant C4da neurons.(A and B) Immunohistochemical analysis of phospho-Ret in third instar larvae of wildtype (A) and Ret mutant animals (B). Specific anti-phospho-Ret signal could be detected in C4da neuron somata of control but not Ret mutant animals (A and B inset). Arrows indicate non-specific antibody signal at epithelial junctions. Scale bar 25 μm. (B) Quantitative analysis of phospho-Ret immunoreactivity in C4da somata of wildtype and Ret mutant samples showing signal over background (ΔF/F, mean plus-minus SD, n = 3, p < 0.05, Student's two-tailed t-test).DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.05491.005 In this study, we provide evidence that Ret is a regulator of dendrite growth and patterning of C4da neurons. Ret is a conserved receptor tyrosine kinase (RTK) expressed in the nervous system of vertebrates (Pachnis et al., 1993; Schuchardt et al., 1994) and D. melanogaster (Sugaya et al., 1994; Hahn and Bishop, 2001), and has been shown to have a number of important functions in nervous system development and maintenance: it regulates motor neuron axon guidance (Kramer et al., 2006), dopaminergic neuron maintenance and regeneration (Kowsky et al., 2007; Kramer et al., 2007), and mechanoreceptor differentiation and projection to the spinal cord and medulla (Bourane et al., 2009; Luo et al., 2009). Ret signaling is activated by binding to glial cell line derived neurotrophic factor (GDNF) family ligands and their high affinity co-receptors, the GDNF family receptors (GFRα) (reviewed in Runeberg-Roos and Saarma, 2007). Ret also plays an important role in human development and disease as loss of function mutations of Ret lead to Hirschprung's disease displaying colonic aganglionosis due to defective enteric nervous system development (Amiel et al., 2008). Conversely, Ret gain of function mutations are causal for autosomal dominant MEN2 (multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2) type medullary thyroid carcinoma (Lairmore et al., 1993; Almeida and Hoff, 2012). All fly stocks were maintained at 25°C and 70% rel. humidity on standard cornmeal/molasses food. The following fly stocks were used: RetC168, RetNP7645, mys1, mewM6, rac1J11, rac1J10rac2ΔmtlΔ (Hakeda-Suzuki et al., 2002; Ng et al., 2002), ppk-CD4-tdTomato, ppk-Gal4, UAS-CD4-tdGFP (Han et al., 2012), trol-GFP, vkg-GFP, UAS-LifeAct-mCherry (kindly provided by J Wildonger).
Neurons develop highly stereotyped receptive fields by coordinated growth of their dendrites. Although cell surface cues play a major role in this process, few dendrite specific signals have been identified to date. We conducted an in vivo RNAi screen in Drosophila class IV dendritic arborization (C4da) neurons and identified the conserved Ret receptor, known to play a role in axon guidance, as an important regulator of dendrite development. The loss of Ret results in severe dendrite defects due to loss of extracellular matrix adhesion, thus impairing growth within a 2D plane. We provide evidence that Ret interacts with integrins to regulate dendrite adhesion via rac1. In addition, Ret is required for dendrite stability and normal F-actin distribution suggesting it has an essential role in dendrite maintenance. We propose novel functions for Ret as a regulator in dendrite patterning and adhesion distinct from its role in axon guidance.
There are hundreds of types of neurons, but all of them are variations on the same basic theme. Each neuron consists of a cell body, which contains the nucleus, and various structures that stick out from the cell body. These include a large number of short protrusions called dendrites, and a long thin cable-like structure called the axon. The dendrites receive incoming signals from the environment or neighboring neurons and transmit these signals to the cell body, which then relays them along the axon and on to the dendrites of the next neuron.