 Cerebellar Purkinje neurons, which provide the sole output from the cerebellar cortex, display a repetitive firing behavior driven by voltage-gated Na+ channels (NaV channels). Fast repetitive firing in Purkinje neurons is promoted by unusual characteristics associated with NaV channel inactivation, whereby channels recover unusually rapidly from inactivation and in doing so pass a ‘resurgent’ sodium current, which helps drive the cell to fire a subsequent action potential. The molecular components underlying the peculiar properties of NaV channels in Purkinje neurons have not been definitively identified. To test whether FGF14 was a contributor to regulation of NaV current in cerebellar Purkinje neurons, we first confirmed its expression in cerebellum and demonstrated that FGF14 co-immunoprecipitates with NaV1.6 channels in mouse cerebellar lysates (Figure 1A). Although FGF14 was previously shown to co-immunoprecipitate with NaV1.6 in a heterologous expression system (Laezza et al., 2009), co-immunoprecipitation between FGF14 and NaV1.6 channels has not been reported from brain.10.7554/eLife.04193.003Figure 1.FGF14 is a component of the NaV1.6 macromolecular complex in mouse cerebellum, but shRNA knockdown does not affect NaV current density in cultured cerebellar Purkinje neurons.(A) Co-immunoprecipitation (IP) of NaV1.6 by FGF14 from mouse cerebellum and immunoblot (IB) with the indicated antibodies. Mw markers are indicated on right. Arrowheads indicate NaV1.6 (top panel) and FGF14 (bottom panel). Intense signal in bottom panel below the FGF14 signal is immunoglobulin light chain. (B) Current-voltage relationships (normalized to cell capacitance) of transient NaV currents from cerebellar Purkinje neurons transfected with Scrambled control shRNA (Scrambled), FGF14 shRNA (shRNA), or FGF14 shRNA plus the shRNA-resistant FGF14bWT (shRNA/FGF14WT). The number of neurons tested, N, is in parentheses. Inset shows schematic of voltage protocol.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.04193.003 Although FGF14 haploinsufficiency is associated with spinocerebellar ataxia (Dalski et al., 2005) and intrinsic excitability of cerebellar Purkinje neurons is reduced in Fgf14−/− mice (Shakkottai et al., 2009), the detailed multifactorial molecular mechanisms by which FGF14 affects neuronal excitability were not previously known. We had found that FGF14 knockdown in cerebellar granule neurons reduced presynaptic voltage-gated Ca2+ currents and thereby affected neurotransmission at the cerebellar granule neuron to Purkinje neuron synapse (Yan et al., 2013). Here, we found that FGF14b in cerebellar Purkinje neurons affects multiple kinetic parameters of NaV channels, thereby reducing the resurgent NaV current that underlies repetitive firing. Together, the accelerated inactivation, reduced channel availability, and decreased late current observed after FGF14 knockdown bias NaV channels to the inactivated state. Thus, the blocking particle that competes with the inactivation gate for open NaV channels is disadvantaged. Consequently, the resurgent current, and the resulting ability to support repetitive firing in Purkinje neurons, is reduced as we observed. Thus, our data show that an essential regulatory feature of FGF14 in cerebellar Purkinje neurons is to slow NaV channel inactivation in order to foster resurgent current. This study was performed in strict accordance with the recommendations in the Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals of the National Institutes of Health. All of the animals were handled according to approved Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) of Duke University (protocol #A292-13-11). Primary dissociated cerebellar neurons were cultured as previously described (Yan et al., 2013) with some modifications. Briefly, primary cultures were prepared from P6-P8 C57BL6 mice. Cerebella were excised, dissected on ice, digested with 0.25% trypsin for 10 min at 37°C with Dulbecco's Modified Eagle's Medium (DMEM, Sigma, St. Louis, MO), and dissociated into single cells by gentle trituration. The cells were seeded onto coverslips coated with 50 μg/ml poly-D-lysine (Sigma) and 25 μg/ml laminin (Sigma) at a density of 2.5-3.0 × 105 cells/coverslip in DMEM supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum (FBS). The neurons were maintained in a humidified incubator in 5% CO2 at 37°C. After 15-16 hr, the medium was replaced with Basal Medium Eagle (BME, Sigma) supplemented with 2% B27 (Invitrogen), 5% FBS, 25 μM uridine, 70 μM 5-fluorodeoxyuridine, and 20 mM KCl. Neurons were transiently transfected at 4 days in vitro with 1 μg plasmid DNA and/or shRNA plasmids per coverslip with calcium phosphate. Experiments were performed 8-10 days after transfection (12-14 days in vitro). To achieve good voltage control, all recordings were performed in neurons cultured no longer than 14 days in vitro.
Rapid firing of cerebellar Purkinje neurons is facilitated in part by a voltage-gated Na+ (NaV) ‘resurgent’ current, which allows renewed Na+ influx during membrane repolarization. Resurgent current results from unbinding of a blocking particle that competes with normal channel inactivation. The underlying molecular components contributing to resurgent current have not been fully identified. In this study, we show that the NaV channel auxiliary subunit FGF14 ‘b’ isoform, a locus for inherited spinocerebellar ataxias, controls resurgent current and repetitive firing in Purkinje neurons. FGF14 knockdown biased NaV channels towards the inactivated state by decreasing channel availability, diminishing the ‘late’ NaV current, and accelerating channel inactivation rate, thereby reducing resurgent current and repetitive spiking. Critical for these effects was both the alternatively spliced FGF14b N-terminus and direct interaction between FGF14b and the NaV C-terminus. Together, these data suggest that the FGF14b N-terminus is a potent regulator of resurgent NaV current in cerebellar Purkinje neurons.
The cerebellum is a region of the brain that is involved in motor control, and it contains a special type of nerve cells called Purkinje neurons. Messages travel along neurons as electrical signals carried by sodium ions, which have a positive electric charge. Normally, when a neuron is ‘at rest’, the plasma membrane that surrounds the neuron prevents the sodium ions outside the cell from entering. To send an electrical signal, voltage-sensitive proteins in the membrane called sodium channels open up. This allows the sodium ions to enter the cell by passing through a pore in the channel protein, thereby changing the voltage across the membrane.