 Most excitatory synapses are formed on dendritic spines—small protrusions that decorate the shaft of neuronal dendrites (Bourne and Harris, 2008; Hotulainen and Hoogenraad, 2010). Changes in the size and shape of individual spines are closely associated with Long-term potentiation (LTP), a cellular correlate of learning and memory (Fifková and Van Harreveld, 1977; Yuste and Bonhoeffer, 2001; Matsuzaki et al., 2004; Bosch and Hayashi, 2012; Murakoshi and Yasuda, 2012). Moreover, abnormal spine morphology and/or density are hallmarks of Intellectual Disability and other cognitive dysfunctions, including Autism-Spectrum Disorders and schizophrenia (Fiala et al., 2002; Penzes et al., 2011). These findings suggest that precise regulation of dendritic spine morphology and number is critical for normal cognition. To address whether palmitoylation of actin regulators facilitates spatial control of actin polymerization in spines, we performed two bioinformatic searches for potential palmitoyl-motifs in actin regulatory proteins. LIMK1 was a prominent hit in both searches and adjacent cysteine residues (Cys7, Cys8, conserved in all vertebrate LIMK1 orthologs) were predicted to be palmitoylated (Figure 1A).10.7554/eLife.06327.003Figure 1.Palmitoylation at a unique di-cysteine motif targets LIMK1 to dendritic spines.(A). Upper panel: LIMK1 schematic, showing predicted palmitoyl-motif (CC, red) and LIM, PDZ and kinase domains. Lower panel: Multiple sequence alignment of the N-terminal region of LIMK1 orthologs from the indicated species. CC palmitoylation motif (highlighted with asterisks) is conserved in vertebrates. (B) HEK293T cells were transfected with C-terminal myc-tagged LIMK1wt (wt-LIMK1-myc) or CCSS-LIMK1-myc (cys 7, 8 mutated to Ser). ABE fractions prepared from lysates were blotted to detect palmitoyl-LIMK1 (top panel). Lysates were blotted to detect total LIMK1 expression (bottom panel). CCSS mutation eliminates LIMK1 palmitoylation. (C) LIMK1 palmitoylation increases, coincident with spine maturation and synapse formation. Hippocampal neurons, cultured for the indicated number of Days in vitro (DIV), were lysed and identical amounts of total protein were subjected to ABE to detect palmitoyl-LIMK1. (D) Homogenate and palmitoylated (ABE) fractions from rat forebrain were blotted to detect LIMK1. (E) Palmitoylation targets LIMK1 to dendritic spines. Representative images of hippocampal neurons (DIV18), transfected to express GFP plus Wt-LIMK1-myc or CCSS-LIMK1-myc and immunostained with the indicated antibodies. Scale bar: 20 μm. Lower panels show magnified images of single dendrites (scale bar: 1 μm). (F) Quantified spine targeting ratio (signal intensity in dendritic spines compared to adjacent dendritic shaft) for each construct from E. Data are mean + SEM for n = 30 neurons for each condition. *p < 0.05, ANOVA with Dunnett's post hoc correction.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.06327.00310.7554/eLife.06327.004Figure 1—figure supplement 1.Palmitoylation helps to anchor LIMK1 in spines.(A) Hippocampal neurons (DIV18) were transfected with the indicated GFP-tagged LIMK1 cDNAs plus morphology marker (mCherry). 18-24 hr post-transfection, a ROI centered on an individual spine (yellow circle) was photobleached (third column) and fluorescence recovery was monitored (right column). (B) Quantified FRAP from n = 12-18 spines per condition from A. (C) Histogram of the stable fraction of wt- and CCSS-LIMK1-GFP, calculated as in ‘Materials and methods’. *p < 0.05, t-test. (D) Histogram of the half-time of recovery of the dynamic fraction of mobile LIMK1-GFP, determined by fitting individual fluorescence recovery traces to a single exponential. * p < 0.05, t-test. Although this result is statistically significant, note that the determination for wt-LIMK1-GFP is affected by the very low fraction of recovery seen in many individual traces, which reduces the accuracy of curve-fitting. Recovery half-times for wt- and CCSS-LIMK1-GFP are markedly longer than other proteins that are predicted to be freely soluble in spines (Star et al., 2002; Bingol et al., 2010; Zheng et al., 2010).DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.06327.00410.7554/eLife.06327.005Figure 1—figure supplement 2.Further evidence that palmitoylation targets LIMK1 to spines.(A) Treatment of hippocampal neurons with the palmitoylation inhibitor 2-Bromopalmitate (2-Br) confirms palmitoylation of LIMK1. Cultured hippocampal neurons (DIV20) were treated with 2-Br (100 µM) or vehicle control (EtOH) for the indicated times. ABE assays were performed to detect palmitoylated and total LIMK1 levels. (B) Representative images of DIV18 hippocampal neurons, transfected to express GFP plus wt-LIMK1-myc, treated with 100 mM 2-Br or vehicle 2 hr post-transfection, fixed 12 hr later and immunostained with the indicated antibodies. Scale bar: 20 μm. Lower panels show magnified images of single dendrites (scale bar: 1 μm). (C) Spine targeting ratio (mean ± SEM) for n = 32 neurons per condition from B. * p < 0.05, ANOVA with Dunnett's post hoc correction. (D) Quantified assessment of dendritic morphology for each condition in B confirms that 2-Br treatment does not affect dendritic spine density, n = 20-30 neurons per condition, p > 0.05, ANOVA with Dunnett's post hoc correction.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.06327.005 The importance of palmitoylation in neuronal regulation is increasingly appreciated, but most studies have focused on how this modification controls the localization of receptors and their ‘scaffold’ protein partners (Fukata and Fukata, 2010; Thomas and Huganir, 2013). This study reveals a novel role for palmitoylation in the spatial control of signaling events that regulate neuronal actin polymerization. It has been unclear how actin regulatory proteins, many of which are predicted to be diffusible, can control spatially precise changes in dendritic spine morphology. Our results suggest that one key factor in the spatial control of actin dynamics is palmitoylation of the actin regulator LIMK1, which is required for normal actin turnover in spines, for spine-specific structural plasticity and for long-term spine stability. These findings reveal new mechanisms that may govern both spine-specific morphological plasticity and perhaps also intra-spine control of actin dynamics. The following antibodies, from the indicated sources, were used: purified myc 9E10 (Enzo Life Sciences, Farmingdale, NY); PSD-95 (K28/43) (Neuromab, UC Davis, CA); Synapsin I, chicken anti-GFP (EMD Millipore, Billerica, MA); mouse anti-GFP 3E6 (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA); LIMK1 (BD Biosciences, San Jose, CA); myc 9B11, LIMK2 8C11, PhosphoLIMK1(T508)/LIMK2(T505), cofilin, phospho-cofilin (Cell Signaling Tech, Danvers, MA); Tubulin (Sigma, St. Louis, MO).
Precise regulation of the dendritic spine actin cytoskeleton is critical for neurodevelopment and neuronal plasticity, but how neurons spatially control actin dynamics is not well defined. Here, we identify direct palmitoylation of the actin regulator LIM kinase-1 (LIMK1) as a novel mechanism to control spine-specific actin dynamics. A conserved palmitoyl-motif is necessary and sufficient to target LIMK1 to spines and to anchor LIMK1 in spines. ShRNA knockdown/rescue experiments reveal that LIMK1 palmitoylation is essential for normal spine actin polymerization, for spine-specific structural plasticity and for long-term spine stability. Palmitoylation is critical for LIMK1 function because this modification not only controls LIMK1 targeting, but is also essential for LIMK1 activation by its membrane-localized upstream activator PAK. These novel roles for palmitoylation in the spatial control of actin dynamics and kinase signaling provide new insights into structural plasticity mechanisms and strengthen links between dendritic spine impairments and neuropathological conditions.
Neurons transmit information from one cell to the next by passing signals across junctions called synapses. For the neurons that receive these signals, these junctions are found on fine branch-like structures called dendrites that stick out of the cell. Dendrites themselves are decorated with smaller structures called dendritic spines, which typically receive information from one other neuron via a single synapse. Dendritic spines form in response to the signaling activity of the neuron, and problems with forming these spines have been linked to conditions such as autism and schizophrenia.