 Resolving structure-function relations remains one of the main challenges of modern neuroscience. The unique cyto-architecture of the cerebellum is characterized by the crystalline matrix of its sagittally oriented PC dendrites and climbing fibers and its orthogonally running parallel fibers (Larsell, 1972; Voogd, 2011). The ubiquitous nature of this relatively simple matrix throughout all lobules and modules of the cerebellar cortex made scientists predict in 1967 that this neuronal machine was probably the first to be elucidated (Eccles, 1967). Yet, about half a century later, we have collected a wealth of information about the molecular and physiological identity of the various cell types in the cerebellum (Gao et al., 2012), but gross structure-function relations are still largely lacking. For example, the amount of evidence for physiological differences within the cerebellar cortex is limited and there is little comparative analysis of spiking activity throughout the cerebellar cortex in adult awake animals. In fact, even most slice physiology studies do not discriminate between lobules or modules, indicative of the fact that the cerebellum is still considered physiologically homogeneous. We performed extracellular recordings from PCs in the cerebellar cortex of awake, restrained C57Bl/6 mice at rest with the use of double-barrel electrodes marking the recording location with Alcian Blue (Figure 1A,B). Purkinje cells were identified by the presence of SSs and CSs and the consistent presence of a pause in SS firing after a CS (i.e., climbing fiber pause) (Figure 1C-F). Recordings that were used for analysis had to meet several criteria including a minimum duration of 120 s, stable spike amplitude over the whole recording period and no detectable tissue damage in a 400-µm radius (see also Figure 1—figure supplement 1). Following perfusion of the animals and processing of their cerebella, the zebrin-negative (Z−) and zebrin-positive (Z+) zones were identified by immunostaining. Of the 104 PCs included in the analysis (50 mice), 47 and 57 cells were located in Z− and Z+ zones, respectively (Figure 1G, plot adapted from Sugihara and Quy, 2007). The SS firing frequency was significantly higher in Z− zones than in Z+ zones (Z−: 96.1 ± 15.4 Hz, Z+: 61.4 ± 19.3 Hz, t = 9.942, p<0.001) (Figure 1H). In line with this the climbing fiber pause was also significantly longer (t = −7.482, p<0.001) in Z+ zones (Figure 1I) (see also Paukert et al., 2010). Both the SS firing frequency, SS regularity and CS firing frequency were stable over time (Figure 1—figure supplement 2). In contrast to the SS firing frequency and climbing fiber pause, the waveform and regularity of SSs did not consistently depend on zebrin identity in that average half-width and mean coefficient of variation for adjacent intervals (CV2) were not significantly different between Z− and Z+ PCs (half-width: t = −1.133, p=0.260, data not shown; CV2: t = 1.197, p=0.234) (Figure 1F-J).10.7554/eLife.02536.003Figure 1.Simple spike firing activity differs between Purkinje cell populations.(A) Extracellular recordings were made from PCs in the cerebellar cortex of awake mice, using double barrel glass electrodes (right). Dye injections were placed to histologically identify the recording location. (B) Photomicrographs of coronal sections with examples of zebrin-negative (Z−, left) and zebrin-positive (Z+, right) identified Purkinje cells in lobule II and lobule IX, respectively. Cells are marked by dye injections (blue, indicated by arrows), zebrin is stained brown, dotted lines demark zebrin borders. Note that Z+ stripes in lobules I-III are very narrow. (C and D) Example trace of Z− and Z+ Purkinje cell recordings identified by its hallmark feature, the occurrence of complex spikes (asterisk) and simple spikes. (E) Recordings were confirmed to be from a single neuron by the consistent pause in simple spike firing following each complex spike, in the overlay. (F) Overlay of simple spikes. (G) Distribution of recorded Z− and Z+ cells throughout the unfolded cerebellar cortex based on zebrin II compartments. (H) Simple spike firing frequency is significantly lower in identified Z+ PCs compared to Z− PCs (Z−: n = 47 cells, 26 mice; Z+: n = 57 cells, 34 mice; t = 9.942, p<0.001). (I) In line with the lower simple spike firing frequency, the climbing fiber pause was longer in identified Z+ Purkinje cells (CF pause; t = −7.482, p<0.001). (J) Simple spike regularity is not different between Z+ and Z− PCs (CV2: t = 1.147, p=0.234). Error bars represent SD, *p<0.05, **p<0.001. Schematic drawing in A was adapted from Sugihara and Quy (2007) with permission. Scale bars in A and B indicate 100 and 200 µm, respectively.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.02536.00310.7554/eLife.02536.004Figure 1—figure supplement 1.Experimental approach and histological verification.(A) To obtain recordings from all cerebellar areas in vivo, we placed craniotomies in different locations. We avoided recording close to the craniotomy to decrease the chance of having to exclude the cells due to tissue damage (B). Five different approaches (top row) were used to cover all cerebellar areas, and recordings were done in a straight line running in either mediolateral or rostrocaudal direction, to assure reliable retrieval after histology. (B) To minimize the potential influence of tissue disruption on the recording results, we excluded all Purkinje cells that showed clear damage to the tissue, visible by light microscope, in a 400 µm radius circle around the dye identified recording location. Cells without detectable damage in surrounding tissue (left) were included, and those with clear damage (right) were excluded. Also, we did not observed obvious cell death in the Z-areas (Welsh et al., 2002).DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.02536.00410.7554/eLife.02536.005Figure 1—figure supplement 2.Stability of key parameters over the recording time.As a measure of recording stability, the key parameters simple spike firing frequency and mean CV2, and complex spike firing frequency were analyzed in bins of 30 s. (A) Minimum duration was 120 s for all Purkinje cell recordings. For clarity, recordings were divided based on zebrin-identity. (B) Normalized values were obtained by dividing for each cell the absolute values binned per 30s in A by the average for the entire recording of that cell. Note that the deviation from average was typically <20% over 30 s bins.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.02536.005 This study provides, to our knowledge, the first evidence for ubiquitously organized differences in cerebellar Purkinje cell firing activity in vivo and for the correlation of these differences to a marker protein, zebrin II. As zebrin, as a biomarker, can be associated with the modular organization of the olivo-cortico-nuclear circuit (Brochu et al., 1990; Voogd et al., 2003; Pijpers et al., 2006; Sugihara and Shinoda, 2007), our results indicate that Purkinje cells within the same module operate around a preferred range of intrinsically determined SS firing frequencies and that this activity is different from modules with a different zebrin identity. Moreover, presumably as a secondary effect, CS activity is also altered. Since the differences were consistently found throughout the entire cerebellar cortex, these findings have direct consequences for all cerebellar functions and the coding schemes they can engage. We recorded in vivo single-unit Purkinje cell activity in adult male C57Bl/6 mice (C57Bl/6J, Charles River), aged 10-35 weeks. Mice were prepared for recordings by placing an immobilizing construct (pedestal) and a craniotomy on their skulls (Badura et al., 2013). In short, the skin over the skull was shaven, and opened along the rostro-caudal midline. Using Optibond (Kerr, Salerno, Italy) and Charisma (Heraeus Kulzer, Hesse, Germany), a U-shaped holder (6 × 4 mm) with a magnet inside (4 × 4 mm, MTG, Weilbach, Germany) was fixed on the skull, overlying the frontal and parietal bones. Next, the medial neck muscles overlying the occipital bone were removed, a craniotomy was made over the interparietal or occipital bone and a recording chamber was placed around it, allowing in vivo electrophysiological recordings throughout different areas in the cerebellum of awake mice. The exact location of the craniotomy depended on the target area, see Figure 1—figure supplement 1 for details. After recovery of >24 hr, mice were head-fixed to a bar, their bodies restrained in a custom-made plastic tube and the dura was opened to facilitate the recording of extracellular Purkinje cell activity, as previously described (Hoebeek et al., 2005). Electrophysiological activity in the cerebellar cortex was recorded using double barrel borosilicate glass pipettes (theta septum, 1.5 OD, 1.02 ID, WPI, FL, USA). To do so, one of the barrels was opened laterally, approximately 10 mm from the taper, to allow entrance of the electrode wire and sealed with glass glue at the back. The other barrel was filled with a blue dye (Alcian Blue, 0.1-0.2% solution in saline; Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA). The recording half of the double barrel pipettes were filled with 2 M NaCl-solution, and had a tip size of 3-6 μm, respectively. Pipettes were advanced into the cerebellum with an oil micro-drive (Narishige, Tokyo, Japan) and signals were pre-amplified (custom-made preamplifier, 1000x DC), filtered (CyberAmp 320, Axon, Molecular Devices, Sunnyvale, CA, USA), digitized (Power1401, CED, Cambridge, UK), and stored for offline analysis. After successful recordings, brief pressure pulses were delivered through the other barrel of the electrode, using a custom-built device, to mark the recording site. To obtain a6-Cacna1a and PC-Δγ2 mice, we used the Cre/loxP system to delete exon 4 of the gene coding for the P/Q-type voltage-gated calcium channel (Cacna1a) selectively from granule cells and exon 4 of the GABAA receptor γ2 subunit gene (Gabrg2) selectively from PCs, respectively, as described previously (Wulff et al., 2009; Galliano et al., 2013). In short, we crossed Cacna1alox/lox mice with Gabra6::Cre (or Δa6::cre) mice (Aller et al., 2003) and Gabrg2lox/lox mice with Pcp2::Cre (or L7::Cre) mice (Oberdick et al., 1990), respectively. From the offspring, that was heterozygous for the floxed genes (i.e., Cacna1alox/+ and Gabrg2lox/+), Cre-negative males were crossed with Cre-positive females to generate, amongst others, Δa6::cre;Cacna1alox/lox (or Cacna1aΔ/Δ, here named a6-Cacna1a) and Pcp2::cre;gabrg2lox/lox (or Gabrg2Δ/Δ, here named PC-Δγ2) mice, respectively. Both lines were maintained in a C57Bl6 background. In the experiments with mutant mice and blocker injections, double and single barrel (2.0 mm OD, 1.16 mm ID, Harvard Apparatus, MA, USA) borosilicate glass pipettes were used, and alcian blue was injected to confirm that the recordings were from lobules I-III or X.
Due to the uniform cyto-architecture of the cerebellar cortex, its overall physiological characteristics have traditionally been considered to be homogeneous. In this study, we show in awake mice at rest that spiking activity of Purkinje cells, the sole output cells of the cerebellar cortex, differs between cerebellar modules and correlates with their expression of the glycolytic enzyme aldolase C or zebrin. Simple spike and complex spike frequencies were significantly higher in Purkinje cells located in zebrin-negative than zebrin-positive modules. The difference in simple spike frequency persisted when the synaptic input to, but not intrinsic activity of, Purkinje cells was manipulated. Blocking TRPC3, the effector channel of a cascade of proteins that have zebrin-like distribution patterns, attenuated the simple spike frequency difference. Our results indicate that zebrin-discriminated cerebellar modules operate at different frequencies, which depend on activation of TRPC3, and that this property is relevant for all cerebellar functions.
The cerebellum, located at the back of the brain underneath the cerebral hemispheres, is best known for its role in the control of movement. Despite its small size, the cerebellum contains more than half of the brain's neurons. These are organized in a repeating pattern in which cells called Purkinje cells receive inputs from two types of fibers: climbing fibers, which ascend into the cerebellum from the brainstem; and parallel fibers, which run perpendicular to the climbing fibers. This gives rise to a characteristic ‘crystalline’ structure.