 Ultradian rhythms with periods ranging from one to several hours have been linked to various aspects of mammalian physiology. Usually superimposed on the 24-hr diurnal or circadian rhythm, ultradian oscillations have been observed in the context of locomotion, sleep, feeding, body temperature, serum hormones, and brain monoamines in species ranging from fruit flies to humans (Tannenbaum and Martin, 1976; Ibuka et al., 1977; Rusak, 1977; Daan and Slopsema, 1978; Honma and Hiroshige, 1978; Dowse et al., 1987; Rivkees, 2003; van Oort et al., 2007; Dowse et al., 2010; Seki and Tanimura, 2014). These physiological cycles most frequently exhibit periods of 2-6 hr, adopting harmonics of the 24-hr daily light-dark cycle or the endogenous circadian rhythm, when external timing cues are absent. However, the generation of such ultradian rhythms does not depend on a functional circadian system nor a light:dark cycle. Ultradian locomotor oscillations persist in rodents housed in constant darkness even upon ablation of the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN), the site of the master circadian pacemaker (Ibuka et al., 1977; Rusak, 1977), or genetic disruption of the circadian clock (Vitaterna et al., 1994; Bunger et al., 2000) (Figure 1A,B). These ultradian activity cycles may not simply be driven by metabolic demand since the 2- to 3-hr rhythm in foraging activity observed in the common vole persists even in the absence of food (Gerkema and van der Leest, 1991). Studies in this species further indicate that one adaptive value of ultradian activity rhythms may lie in the facilitation of social synchrony, which is suggested to reduce predator risk in this species (Gerkema and Verhulst, 1990). However, despite their prevalence and hypothesized biological significance, ultradian locomotor rhythms have received little research attention, likely owing to their frequently masked expression and unstable periodicity in contrast with circadian activity rhythms (Ruis et al., 1987; Schibler, 2008) (Figure 1C,D).10.7554/eLife.05105.003Figure 1.Inter- and intra-animal variability of ultradian activity rhythms across time in circadian incompetent mice.(A) Representative double-plotted actograms of running wheel activity in SCN-lesioned (SCNx) and Bmal1−/− mice in DD. (B) Dot plot of locomotor period length in DD based on Lomb-Scargle periodogram analysis of seven consecutive days of activity recording (N = 65 for Bmal1−/− and N = 48 for SCNx; t111 = 0.2785, p = 0.78, unpaired t-test). (C) Intra-animal period variability expressed as mean ± SD for each animal, ranked according to mean period length derived from continuous wavelet transforms (CWT) for the 1-12-hr frequency range (same animals and timespans for calculation as in B). (D) CWT-heatmaps showing decibel scaled and normalized amplitude of oscillations according to frequency and time with black traces indicating the ridge of local amplitude maxima.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.05105.003 To gain insights into the mechanistic basis of ultradian locomotor rhythm generation, we considered that locomotor activity is associated with an awakened state (Welsh et al., 1988) and consequently, the ultradian locomotor rhythms observed in mice that lack circadian clock function (Figure 1) could be interpreted as rhythms of heightened wakefulness or arousal. In mammals, a key role in arousal promotion has been attributed to distinct monoaminergic neuronal populations located in the upper brainstem and midbrain (Brown et al., 2012). While altering extracellular levels of the arousal-associated monoamines serotonin, norepinephrine, or histamine by genetic manipulation has only limited effects on locomotion (Thomas and Palmiter, 1997; Bengel et al., 1998; Xu et al., 2000; Parmentier et al., 2002; Zhao et al., 2006), depleting the brain of dopamine (DA) profoundly abrogates locomotor activity (Zhou and Palmiter, 1995). Moreover, increasing extracellular DA levels induces hyperlocomotion (Giros et al., 1996) and lengthens the time spent awake (Wisor et al., 2001). We therefore speculated that altering DA tone may affect ultradian rhythm generation. To test this, we examined running wheel activity in mice carrying a disruption in the Slc6a3 gene, which encodes the dopamine transporter (DAT). Slc6a3−/− mice exhibit hyperdopaminergia due to the lack of DAT-mediated DA reuptake into dopaminergic neurons, leading to a hyperactivity phenotype (Giros et al., 1996; Gainetdinov et al., 1998). As the presence of the circadian clock and/or a light:dark cycle frequently masks ultradian activity rhythms (Schibler, 2008), we assessed the locomotor behavioral consequences of DAT elimination in the absence of the master SCN circadian pacemaker. To do so, we electrolytically lesioned the SCN of Slc6a3−/− mice and their wildtype littermates and monitored their running wheel behavior in constant darkness (DD). While control mice (SCNx-Slc6a3+/+) exhibited ultradian activity rhythms with the expected ∼4-hr period, SCNx-Slc6a3−/− mice showed rhythms whose periods were three times longer (Figure 2A,B). Analysis of mice that were deficient for both DAT and the essential clock component BMAL1 (Bmal1−/−, Slc6a3−/−) corroborated this finding. Bmal1−/−, Slc6a3−/− mice exhibited ∼12-14-hr rhythms in locomotor activity, largely phenocopying the SCNx-Slc6a3−/− mice, while their Bmal1−/−, Slc6a3+/+ littermates showed ∼4-hr periods as expected for isodopaminergic mice lacking circadian clock function (Figure 2C,D). Together, these results suggest that DAT removal markedly increases ultradian cycle length. Alternatively, the ∼12-hr rhythms observed in SCNx-Slc6a3−/− and Bmal1−/−, Slc6a3−/− animals may originate from an independent oscillator, one that is activated by DAT elimination, while the short period ultradian oscillator that operates in DAT intact, SCNx or Bmal1−/− animals is disengaged or otherwise obscured.10.7554/eLife.05105.004Figure 2.Dopamine transporter knockout alters periodicity of ultradian locomotor rhythms in circadian incompetent mice under constant darkness.(A) Representative, double-plotted actograms demonstrating marked lengthening of ultradian locomotor periods in SCNx-Slc6a3−/− mice as compared to SCNx-Slc6a3+/+ littermates. Tau(τ) indicates individual period. (B) Period length averages of ultradian activity (N = 7; F1,6 = 253.8, ***p < 0.0001, ANOVA) from Lomb-Scargle periodogram analysis of 7-day time-spans. (C) Representative, double-plotted actograms demonstrating markedly increased ultradian period lengths in Bmal1−/−, Slc6a3−/− mice as compared to Bmal1−/−, Slc6a3+/+ mice. (D) Period length averages of ultradian activity (N = 4; F1,3 = 194.2, ***p < 0.001, ANOVA) from Lomb-Scargle periodogram analysis of 7-day time- spans.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.05105.004 Collectively, our results provide strong evidence that a dopaminergic ultradian oscillator (DUO) driving rhythms of behavioral arousal is continuously operative in the mammalian brain. We propose that under normal conditions, this DUO cycles in harmony with the circadian SCN pacemaker and that the rhythmic information of both the SCN and the DUO are integrated at a common downstream site to create the daily pattern in locomotor activity (Figure 9A). However, elevation of DA tone can lead to DUO period lengthening, which either results in DUO free-run (for example, Figure 7D,G) or reinstatement of oscillator synchrony albeit at a different harmonic (Figure 9B, e.g., 48 hr). The DUO appears as a highly tunable oscillator, able to adopt period lengths from a few hours to multiple days. This is in stark contrast to the circadian timer which cannot adopt periods that are more than a few hours off from 24 hr when its limits of entrainment are tested experimentally (Aschoff and Pohl, 1978).10.7554/eLife.05105.011Figure 9.Proposed model of circadian and ultradian oscillator output integration to govern daily locomotor behavior.(A) Light input entrains the circadian (SCN) and (indirectly) the ultradian (DUO) oscillators creating a stable phase relationship. Their rhythmic outputs, upon integration at a common downstream effector, generate the daily pattern of locomotor activity. (B) Under conditions of high DA tone (e.g., DAT elimination or Meth-treatment), DUO period lengthens, leading to a second, separate activity rhythm. This rhythm either free-runs (see Figure 7D,G) or phase locks with the SCN pacemaker by adopting a subharmonic, that is, 48-hr period, as frequently observed upon Meth treatment. Representative output plots show average activity of individual mice computed from 8 days of ambulatory activity (A) or 14 days of running wheel activity under Meth treatment (B).DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.05105.011 Bmal1−/− (Bunger et al., 2000) and DAT-Cre (Turiault et al., 2007) mice were on a C57BL/6J genetic background, while Slc6a3−/− mice (Giros et al., 1996) were maintained on a mixed C57BL/6JxDBA/2J background (Morice et al., 2004). Animals were housed under LD 12 hr:12 hr unless otherwise stated. Slc6a3−/− mice were found to exhibit high attrition rates (∼80%) in experiments that involve long-term locomotor activity monitoring. To increase survival, Slc6a3−/− mice were first group-housed for 1 week after transfer into the light-tight, ventilated cabinets used for activity monitoring. This was followed by 1 week of individual housing in running wheel cages with the wheels locked before commencing baseline activity recordings. During this adaptation phase and throughout the subsequent experimental period, both Slc6a3−/− mice and their wild-type littermates were provided with ad libitum chocolate flavored chow (Supreme Mini-Treats, BioServ, Flemington, NJ) as well as cotton nestlets and ample shredded corrugated card stock. This regimen significantly reduced attrition rates to less than 20% on average. ‘Material and methods’ were performed in accordance with the Canadian Council on Animal Care guidelines and approved by the McGill University Animal Care Committee.
Ultradian (∼4 hr) rhythms in locomotor activity that do not depend on the master circadian pacemaker in the suprachiasmatic nucleus have been observed across mammalian species, however, the underlying mechanisms driving these rhythms are unknown. We show that disruption of the dopamine transporter gene lengthens the period of ultradian locomotor rhythms in mice. Period lengthening also results from chemogenetic activation of midbrain dopamine neurons and psychostimulant treatment, while the antipsychotic haloperidol has the opposite effect. We further reveal that striatal dopamine levels fluctuate in synchrony with ultradian activity cycles and that dopaminergic tone strongly predicts ultradian period. Our data indicate that an arousal regulating, dopaminergic ultradian oscillator (DUO) operates in the mammalian brain, which normally cycles in harmony with the circadian clock, but can desynchronize when dopamine tone is elevated, thereby producing aberrant patterns of arousal which are strikingly similar to perturbed sleep-wake cycles comorbid with psychopathology.
The sleep-wake cycle of mammals is controlled by a ‘circadian clock’ within the brain, which is synchronized to the day-night cycle. However, other aspects of mammalian physiology including alertness and activity levels, as well as appetite and body temperature—fluctuate in cycles that repeat every few hours. These cycles are known as ultradian rhythms, and they may offer survival benefits by enabling potentially risky behaviors, such as foraging, to be coordinated between members of a group.