 Signaling through G protein-coupled receptors for the inhibitory neurotransmitter GABA (GABABR) has been recognized to play key roles in mood, nociception, memory, reward, and movement (Bowery, 2006; Padgett and Slesinger, 2010). In the hippocampus, activation of postsynaptic GABABR on pyramidal neurons produces slow inhibitory postsynaptic currents (sIPSCs), which counteract the excitatory influence of ionotropic glutamate receptors to shape neuronal output (Ulrich and Bettler, 2007; Luscher and Slesinger, 2010). As a result, GABABR signaling profoundly affects hippocampal synaptic plasticity and has marked effects on memory formation (Davies et al., 1991; Wagner and Alger, 1995; Schuler et al., 2001). We began by characterizing the expression of RGS complex subunits in the mouse hippocampus. We detected robust expression of RGS6, RGS7, R7BP and Gβ5 by western blotting (Figure 1A). To understand the contribution of individual subunits to GABABR-GIRK signaling, we studied the effects of selective knockout of Rgs6, Rgs7, and R7bp in mice. Elimination of RGS7 dramatically reduced levels of Gβ5 and R7BP in the hippocampus (Figure 1A,B). In contrast, elimination of RGS6 had no significant effect on the expression of R7BP or Gβ5. Similarly, loss of one RGS protein did not affect the expression of the other, or the GIRK channel subunit GIRK2. Given the interdependence of subunit expression in R7 RGS complexes (Chen et al., 2003; Anderson et al., 2007; Grabowska et al., 2008), these results suggested that RGS7 was likely the dominant catalytic subunit in the hippocampus.10.7554/eLife.02053.003Figure 1.RGS7 and R7BP modulate GABABR-GIRK signaling in cultured hippocampal neurons.(A) Western blot analysis of protein expression in hippocampi extracted from wild-type (WT) mice, or mice lacking RGS7 (Rgs7−/−), RGS6 (Rgs6−/−) or R7BP (R7bp−/−). (B) Quantification of Western blotting data, with protein levels arrayed as a function of genotype, ***p<0.01, One-Way ANOVA n = 3 mice. ND-undetectable. (C) Representative normalized traces of GIRK currents evoked by a saturating concentration of the GABABR agonist baclofen (100 µM). (D-E) Rgs6, Rgs7, and R7bp knockouts do not affect GIRK current amplitudes (D), desensitization (E) and current onset kinetics (F) evoked by 100 μM Baclofen. p>0.05, One-Way ANOVA, n = 8-29 cells for each genotype. (G) Current deactivation rate following removal of baclofen was slower in neurons from Rgs7−/− and R7bp−/− mice as compared to WT controls, *p<0.05 and **p<0.01 vs WT, †††p<0.001 Rgs7−/− vs R7bp−/−. One-Way ANOVA, Bonferroni’s post hoc test, n = 8-29 cells.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.02053.003 The results of this study, together with prior investigations, establish the RGS7/Gβ5/R7BP complex as an essential regulator of GABABR-GIRK signaling in the hippocampus. In hippocampal neurons, RGS7 is closely co-localized with both GABABR and GIRK2-containing channels (Fajardo-Serrano et al., 2013). Furthermore, in transfected cells, RGS7 can directly interact with GIRK channel subunits as demonstrated by both co-immunoprecipitation and bioluminescence energy transfer approaches (Xie et al., 2010; Zhou et al., 2012). The complex may further involve GABABR as well as G protein subunits (Kovoor and Lester, 2002; Fajardo-Serrano et al., 2013), supporting the contention that components of the entire pathway are scaffolded into a larger macromolecular assembly. All studies were carried out in accordance with the National Institute of Health guidelines and were granted formal approval by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee of the Scripps Research Institute. The generation of Rgs6−/− (Posokhova et al., 2010), Rgs7−/− (Cao et al., 2012), R7bp−/− (Anderson et al., 2007) mice were described earlier. All animals used for comparing genotypes were littermates derived from heterozygous breeding pairs. Mice were housed in groups on a 12 hr light-dark cycle with food and water available ad libitum. Males and females (2-5 months) were used for all experiments.
In the hippocampus, the inhibitory neurotransmitter GABA shapes the activity of the output pyramidal neurons and plays important role in cognition. Most of its inhibitory effects are mediated by signaling from GABAB receptor to the G protein-gated Inwardly-rectifying K+ (GIRK) channels. Here, we show that RGS7, in cooperation with its binding partner R7BP, regulates GABABR-GIRK signaling in hippocampal pyramidal neurons. Deletion of RGS7 in mice dramatically sensitizes GIRK responses to GABAB receptor stimulation and markedly slows channel deactivation kinetics. Enhanced activity of this signaling pathway leads to decreased neuronal excitability and selective disruption of inhibitory forms of synaptic plasticity. As a result, mice lacking RGS7 exhibit deficits in learning and memory. We further report that RGS7 is selectively modulated by its membrane anchoring subunit R7BP, which sets the dynamic range of GIRK responses. Together, these results demonstrate a novel role of RGS7 in hippocampal synaptic plasticity and memory formation.
Neurons communicate with one another at junctions called synapses. The arrival of an electrical signal known as an action potential at the first cell causes molecules known as neurotransmitters to be released into the synapse. These molecules diffuse across the gap between the neurons and bind to receptors on the receiving cell. Some neurotransmitters, such as glutamate, activate cells when they bind to receptors, thus making it easier for the second neuron to ‘fire’ (i.e., to generate an action potential). By contrast, other neurotransmitters, such as GABA, usually make it harder for the second neuron to fire.