 Temporal correlations in activity between brain areas can be measured with functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) and are often referred to as indices of ‘functional connectivity’ (Friston, 1994). Statistical dependencies between remote cortical regions exist both in the absence of external stimuli or task demands (i.e., during the resting state) and during execution of a task (Hampson et al., 2002). In the following, the term functional connectivity therefore simply describes a statistical relationship of neural elements with each other. In addition to providing insights into the basic anatomical and physiological organization of healthy neural networks (Fox and Raichle, 2007; Bullmore and Sporns, 2009; Smith et al., 2009; O'Reilly et al., 2013), functional connectivity has been used to identify pathological changes occurring in neural circuits in conditions such as stroke (Wang et al., 2010), traumatic brain injury (Bonnelle et al., 2011; Ham and Sharp, 2012), neurodegeneration (Seeley et al., 2009), or psychiatric disorders (Bassett et al., 2008). In Experiment 1, each participant (N = 15) underwent two sets of two 5-min fMRI scans for the purpose of assessing functional connectivity in both a baseline state and then again immediately after application of repeated paired-pulse TMS to both PMv and M1 (90 pulse pairs; repeated at 0.1 Hz for 15 min; Figure 1A,B). The connections from premotor cortex to M1 are excitatory glutamatergic ones (Tokuno and Nambu, 2000), but within M1 they synapse on both excitatory pyramidal neurons and inhibitory interneurons. Such PMv TMS pulses therefore induce a combination of facilitatory and inhibitory influences on M1 activity; which influence becomes most visible depends on the TMS pulse intensity and subjects' cognitive state at the time of testing (i.e., following plasticity induction) (Bäumer et al., 2009; Buch et al., 2010, 2011). We counterbalanced the order of baseline and post-TMS scans across subjects (half of the subjects had the post-TMS scan before the baseline scan on two different days; Figure 1D). In this study, we describe the functional connectivity signature in fMRI data of short-term synaptic potentiation within a specific anatomical pathway. Using two different paired-pulse TMS manipulations, we demonstrated that application of a TMS protocol known to change synaptic efficacy within a motor pathway (PMv-M1) results in increases in functional connectivity along the same pathway that can be measured with fMRI. Furthermore, we established a significant correlation between the size of the causal influence of PMv on M1 (effective connectivity as assessed by paired-pulse TMS) and the fMRI-based index of functional connectivity across individuals. 15 subjects (eight males) participated in Experiment 1; fifteen subjects (nine males) participated in Experiment 2. For Experiment 3, paired-pulse TMS data were obtained for 10 participants from Experiment 1 (five males). The overall mean age of all participants was 24 plus-minus 4 years (mean plus-minus SD). The study was approved by the local ethics committee and informed consent was obtained from all subjects.
Correlations in brain activity between two areas (functional connectivity) have been shown to relate to their underlying structural connections. We examine the possibility that functional connectivity also reflects short-term changes in synaptic efficacy. We demonstrate that paired transcranial magnetic stimulation (TMS) near ventral premotor cortex (PMv) and primary motor cortex (M1) with a short 8-ms inter-pulse interval evoking synchronous pre- and post-synaptic activity and which strengthens interregional connectivity between the two areas in a pattern consistent with Hebbian plasticity, leads to increased functional connectivity between PMv and M1 as measured with functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI). Moreover, we show that strengthening connectivity between these nodes has effects on a wider network of areas, such as decreasing coupling in a parallel motor programming stream. A control experiment revealed that identical TMS pulses at identical frequencies caused no change in fMRI-measured functional connectivity when the inter-pulse-interval was too long for Hebbian-like plasticity.
When a person has their brain scanned, the resulting images show that regions with similar roles tend to be active at the same time. These coordinated patterns of activity are often altered in the brains of patients with neurological or psychiatric disorders. However, relatively little is known about how the patterns are generated.