 Associative memory in animals and humans provides a model of the environment. Retrieval of such memories, driven by cues or occurring autonomously, is suggested as central to a wide variety of processes and functions, including online and offline planning and model-learning (Sutton, 1991; Moore and Atkeson, 1993; Foster and Wilson, 2006; Johnson and Redish, 2007; Hasselmo, 2008; Lisman and Redish, 2009; Gupta et al., 2010; van der Meer et al., 2010; Jadhav et al., 2012; Wimmer and Shohamy, 2012; Pfeiffer and Foster, 2013; Singer et al., 2013), cognitive search (Kurth-Nelson et al., 2012; Todd et al., 2012; Morton et al., 2013), mental time travel (Hopfield, 2010; Schacter et al., 2012), memory maintenance and consolidation (Marr, 1971; Nádasdy et al., 1999; Káli and Dayan, 2004; Kuhl et al., 2012; Deuker et al., 2013) as well as temporal expectation (Sakai and Miyashita, 1991; Rainer et al., 1999). We used a slightly modified version of the behavioral task employed by Wimmer and Shohamy (2012). This involved three phases (Figure 1A). In the Association phase, subjects watched visual stimuli appearing sequentially at the center of the screen. The stimuli alternated between photographs (‘Si’) and circular fractals (‘Sd’), with a short blank fixation interval between each stimulus. Each Si came from one of three categories (face/body/scene), and each unique Si was deterministically followed by a unique Sd, thus establishing a pairing between Si and Sd images. As in Wimmer and Shohamy (2012), debriefing revealed that subjects were not aware of the Si-Sd pairings. There were two unique Si in each category; making for a total of six unique Si and six unique Sd stimuli used for later phases (along with six additional unique Si and six additional unique Sd that functioned as dummies for the Association phase cover task and were included in the imaging analysis).10.7554/eLife.04919.003Figure 1.Task design and behavior.Subjects participated in a sensory preconditioning task comprising three phases: Association, Reward and Decision. (A) In the Association phase, subjects were exposed to pairs of stimuli (presented sequentially). One member (called Si) of each pair was taken from one of three classes (faces, bodies, and scenes); the other member (Sd) was a fractal. In the Reward phase, some of the fractals (labelled Sd+) were paired with reward; the others (labelled Sd−) were not. Through the pairing, this implicitly established a separation between Si+ and Si−. In the Decision phase, subjects chose between Si+ and Si− within the same category, or between Sd+ and Sd−. All photos shown are from pixabay.com and are in the public domain. (B) In the Decision phase, subjects displayed a strong preference for Sd+ over Sd− (p = 6.9 × 10−4, one-sample t-test). There was no preference at the group level for Si+ over Si−, but we exploited the variability between subjects for value-related analyses. The change in relative liking from before to after the experiment was more positive for Sd+ than Sd− (p = 0.04, one-sample t-test); but there was no significant difference between the changes for Si+ and Si−. Bar heights show group means and dots show individual subjects. Error bars show standard error of the mean.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.04919.003 We used a sensory preconditioning paradigm to explore the temporal structure of the retrieval of representations through associative links. We found that presenting photographs (Si, in three categories) elicited an evolving representation with two temporally distinct components: one around 200 ms and the other around 400 ms after stimulus onset. The earlier component was reinstated when a fractal (Sd) previously paired with the Si was presented. The later component was reinstated when a rewarding or neutral outcome was presented following Sd. Although at the group level there was no significant reinstatement of the earlier component at the time of outcome, between subjects the degree of reinstatement of this earlier component correlated with the degree of subsequent value generalization. Twenty-nine adults participated in the experiment, recruited from the UCL Institute of Cognitive Neuroscience subject pool. Three were excluded before the start of analysis for large movement or myographic artifacts. Of the 26 remaining, age quartiles were 18.7, 19.5, 21.3, 26.7, 41.4 years; 14 were female, and 1 was left-handed. All participants had normal or corrected-to-normal vision and had no history of psychiatric or neurological disorders. All participants provided written informed consent and consent to publish prior to start of the experiment, which was approved by the Research Ethics Committee at University College London (UK), under ethics number 1825/005.
Electrophysiological data disclose rich dynamics in patterns of neural activity evoked by sensory objects. Retrieving objects from memory reinstates components of this activity. In humans, the temporal structure of this retrieved activity remains largely unexplored, and here we address this gap using the spatiotemporal precision of magnetoencephalography (MEG). In a sensory preconditioning paradigm, 'indirect' objects were paired with 'direct' objects to form associative links, and the latter were then paired with rewards. Using multivariate analysis methods we examined the short-time evolution of neural representations of indirect objects retrieved during reward-learning about direct objects. We found two components of the evoked representation of the indirect stimulus, 200 ms apart. The strength of retrieval of one, but not the other, representational component correlated with generalization of reward learning from direct to indirect stimuli. We suggest the temporal structure within retrieved neural representations may be key to their function.
Seeing an object triggers a complex and carefully orchestrated dance of brain activity. The spatial pattern of the brain activity encoding the object can change multiple times even within the first second of seeing the object. These rapid changes appear to be a core feature of how the brain understands and processes objects.