 Persistence in performing a goal-orientated behavior must be balanced by behavioral termination cues once the task is completed. One such behavior, mating, is important for species propagation and can improve an individual's ability to cope with stress (Neumann, 2009). In humans, rats, and other animals, a period of disinterest and mating inability follows ejaculation in males (Beach and Holz-Tucker, 1949; Masters and Johnson, 1966; Barfield and Geyer, 1972; Oomura et al., 1983; Ureshi et al., 2002). Primarily studied in rodents, sexual disinterest and inability following mating are described in two ways: the refractory period, defined by the short term duration between consecutive ejaculations (Levin, 2009), and sexual satiation or exhaustion, a period of time following repeated copulations where the male rats require 6-14 days to regain sexual potency (Beach and Jordan, 1956). If a male rat is considered to be sexually satiated, he cannot sire progeny even if he engages in copulatory activity (Tlachi-Lopez et al., 2012; Lucio et al., 2014). Similar to other species, C. elegans males exhibit a period of reduced activity following ejaculation (Barfield and Geyer, 1972; Oomura et al., 1983; Ureshi et al., 2002). To develop metrics for measuring how the male's behavior changes immediately after mating, we first determined how fast C. elegans males re-copulate following ejaculation. Within 2 min after being placed on a 5 mm diameter bacterial lawn containing 15 immobile hermaphrodites, 1-day-old virgin males commenced mating and inserted their spicules into the hermaphrodites (Figure 1B, Figure 3A). However following ejaculation, ∼12 min (SD = ±6 min 30 s) passed before they intromit their spicules again (Figure 3A). The males obviously regained the ability to mate prior to the 2nd intromission, but their individual mating behaviors were variable, preventing us from establishing a metric to determine effectively when their full ability to mate returned. Thus, we conservatively refer to the interval from the 1st spicule insertion to the 2nd spicule insertion as the ‘refractory period’. We then asked if the refractory period duration was due to mating disinterest, reduced motor ability, or a combination of both.10.7554/eLife.02938.005Figure 3.The refractory period is regulated by sperm release.Line represents median. (A) 1st insert: the time required for a male to insert his copulatory spicules into the hermaphrodite vulva from the time he was placed with the hermaphrodites. 2nd insert: the time from 1st insert to finding a second hermaphrodite and repeating the mating process (refractory period). y-axis, the time it takes a male to insert his spicules, x-axis, insertion number. (B) Mating drive. 1st commencement: the time it takes the male to begin mating with a hermaphrodite after being placed on a mating lawn. 2nd commencement: the time from retraction to the next beginning of mating. (C) The total time the male spent at the vulva prior to insert. (D) The number of vulva passes prior to insertion. (A-D) n = 17. *p<0.05, **p<0.005, ***p<0.0001, paired t test. (E) The number of progeny sired following successive couplings. Males are grouped into two categories: males that re-copulated between 3 and 8:59 min following the 1st insertion and males that re-copulated between 9 and 30 min following the first insertion. The letters identify the same male for each insertion. x-axis indicates the insert as well as what refractory period group each male was placed in. y-axis is the number of progeny each male sired for the indicated insert. **p<0.05, Mann-Whitney test. (F and G) The first insert (F) and refractory period (G) for males with the indicated cell(s) removed. *p<0.05, Mann-Whitney test. n is indicated below the x-axis. The x-axis indicates the cells removed during the operation, and the y-axis indicates the time it took for males to insert their spicules into the hermaphrodite.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.02938.005 Much remains to be discovered concerning the molecular and structural pathways involved in post ejaculatory behavioral activity (Levin, 2009; Turley and Rowland, 2013). Mating is energy-costly and precludes participation in other behaviors such as feeding (Schneider et al., 2013). Thus, a period of reduced activity following successful copulation is advantageous to organisms. In rats, the post ejaculatory interval represents the period (∼6-10 min) between ejaculations. After at least five successive ejaculations, males achieve a state of sexual satiation. During satiation, male rats will not mate again for 6-14 days (Beach and Jordan, 1956; Phillips-Farfan and Fernandez-Guasti, 2009). In this work, we also measured the post ejaculatory period in C. elegans males, referred to as the refractory period. However, we do not know if C. elegans males achieve a state of sexual satiation as exhibited by rodents. C. elegans males display an average lifespan of 12 days, show significant decline in sexual function at day 3, and are unable to sire progeny by day 5 (Gems and Riddle, 1996; Guo et al., 2012). Therefore, the advantages C. elegans males would have by exhibiting an extended satiation time after multiple intromissions are uncertain, since their functional reproductive span is very short. Animals were maintained on NGM agar plates with E. coli strain OP50 and contain him-5(e1490) for their high instance of males (Brenner, 1974; Hodgkin et al., 1979). Strains used in this study were: let-23(sy1) (Aroian and Sternberg, 1991) on LGII, pha-1(e2123) (Schnabel and Schnabel, 1990) and unc-64(e426) (Brenner, 1974) on LGIII, rgIs6[Punc-17 small:ChR2::YFP, Punc-103B:ChR2::YFP, Pgar-3B:ChR2::YFP] on LGIV, and lite-1(ce314) on LGX (Edwards et al., 2008).
The circuit structure and function underlying post-coital male behaviors remain poorly understood. Using mutant analysis, laser ablation, optogenetics, and Ca2+ imaging, we observed that following C. elegans male copulation, the duration of post-coital lethargy is coupled to cellular events involved in ejaculation. We show that the SPV and SPD spicule-associated sensory neurons and the spicule socket neuronal support cells function with intromission circuit components, including the cholinergic SPC and PCB and the glutamatergic PCA sensory-motor neurons, to coordinate sex muscle contractions with initiation and continuation of sperm movement. Our observations suggest that the SPV and SPD and their associated dopamine-containing socket cells sense the intrauterine environment through cellular endings exposed at the spicule tips and regulate both sperm release into the hermaphrodite and the recovery from post-coital lethargy.
The nematode worm, C. elegans, is roughly 1 mm long, made up of around 1000 cells and has two sexes: male and hermaphrodite. Hermaphrodite worms produce both eggs and sperm and can self-fertilize to generate around 300 offspring each time. Fertilization by a male, on the other hand, results in three times as many progeny and introduces genetic diversity into the population. However, it also reduces the lifespan of the hermaphrodite.