 Inherently emotional stimuli and stimuli that have acquired emotional meaning through learning can enhance spatial attention (Armony and Dolan, 2002; Maunsell, 2004; Anderson, 2005; Phelps et al., 2006; Peck et al., 2009). Enhanced spatial attention improves sensory processing of behaviorally relevant stimuli (Anderson et al., 2011) and quickens purposeful actions based on these stimuli (Posner, 1980). Subjects must not only register the emotional significance of a stimulus to enhance spatial attention, but they also must locate the stimulus. For example, in the wild, carnivores must identify potential predators and prey, register their emotional or motivational significance, and then locate the predator or prey if they want to mount an attack or retreat. The brain must therefore combine information about the motivational significance and location of stimuli to enhance spatial attention and facilitate actions. We trained two monkeys on a detection task in which conditioned stimuli associated with either appetitive or aversive outcomes biased attention (Figure 1A). While monkeys maintained fixation, two visual cues appeared briefly for 300 ms on either side of the fixation point. Following cue offset, a variable-length delay period ensued before the 50 ms presentation of a barely-perceptible target in the same location as one of the two cues. The monkeys completed the trial correctly (a ‘hit’) by making a saccadic eye movement to the location of the target within 600 ms. Generally, ‘miss’ trials occurred when the monkey failed to make a saccade at all (61% of miss trials) since the timing of target onset was variable and the target itself was difficult to detect; however, miss trials also included those where a saccade was directed towards the location opposite the target (28% of incorrect trials) or elsewhere (11% of incorrect trials). All trials where monkeys' gaze left the fixation window before target onset were repeated such that they could not avoid a particular trial type.10.7554/eLife.04478.003Figure 1.Detection task design.(A) Task schematic. After fixating, a pair of cues appeared at either side of the fixation point. Following a variable delay, a target appeared at one of the two locations; trials were scored a ‘hit’ if monkeys made a saccade to the target's location and a ‘miss’ if they failed to do so. (B) Association between cues and outcomes. The table illustrates the outcomes associated with each cue type (given that the target appeared at that cue's location) on hit and miss trials. (C) Trial types. On a given trial, monkeys viewed a reward and punishment cue (R/P), a reward and neutral cue (R/N), or a punishment and neutral cue (P/N). Each trial type had two possible spatial configurations (only one configuration is shown).DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.04478.003 Attention to visual stimuli that predict appetitive and aversive events can promote survival by enhancing rapid and accurate approach or avoidance responses in anticipation of upcoming events. Recent work demonstrated that the responses of amygdala neurons are modulated by the spatial location of reward-predictive stimuli (Peck et al., 2013), but it remained unknown whether the location of stimuli that threaten aversive experiences influence neural responses in a similar manner. In the present report, monkeys allocated attention towards stimuli that promised reward or threatened punishment. Amygdala neural activity represented the location and motivational significance of visual stimuli in a coordinated manner. Neurons that responded more strongly when a stimulus associated with motivationally significant outcomes appeared also responded more strongly when such stimuli appeared in the contralateral field. Other neurons had the opposite response profile, responding least strongly to visual stimuli associated with motivationally significant outcomes, especially when they appeared in the contralateral field. Importantly, neural activity reflected biases in spatial attention that were induced by the appearance of stimuli associated with appetitive or aversive outcomes. The amygdala therefore may not merely influence attention by modulating arousal, a non-spatial mechanism. Instead, the amygdala may also influence spatial attention—a process distinct from arousal—by encoding information about both the spatial location and motivational significance of sensory cues associated with appetitive and aversive outcomes. Two male rhesus monkeys (Macaca mulatta, 8-10 kg) were used in these experiments. All Materials and methods complied with the National Institutes of Health guidelines and were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committees at the New York State Psychiatric Institute and Columbia University. General methods for these experiments have been described previously (Peck et al., 2013).
Humans and other animals routinely identify and attend to sensory stimuli so as to rapidly acquire rewards or avoid aversive experiences. Emotional arousal, a process mediated by the amygdala, can enhance attention to stimuli in a non-spatial manner. However, amygdala neural activity was recently shown to encode spatial information about reward-predictive stimuli, and to correlate with spatial attention allocation. If representing the motivational significance of sensory stimuli within a spatial framework reflects a general principle of amygdala function, then spatially selective neural responses should also be elicited by sensory stimuli threatening aversive events. Recordings from amygdala neurons were therefore obtained while monkeys directed spatial attention towards stimuli promising reward or threatening punishment. Neural responses encoded spatial information similarly for stimuli associated with both valences of reinforcement, and responses reflected spatial attention allocation. The amygdala therefore may act to enhance spatial attention to sensory stimuli associated with rewarding or aversive experiences.
In our everyday lives, we are surrounded by stimuli that compete for our attention. However, the brain pays more attention to some stimuli—such as those that signal rewards or warn of potential threats—than to others. These stimuli receive extra attention because they activate a structure deep within the brain called the amygdala.