 “high” vs “low status”, “top of the heap”, “bottom of the barrel”: These or similar expressions are widely observed across cultures and languages (Pinker, 1997). The cross-modal correspondence between the visuospatial domain (high or low) and an abstract domain (rank) has been described as a conceptual metaphor (Lakoff and Johnson, 1980a, b) and thought to be uniquely human (Feldman and Narayanan, 2004). A conceptual metaphor takes one concept and connects that to another concept in order to better understand that concept. The way we think and act is largely influenced by conceptual metaphors, even without being fully aware of them (Lakoff and Johnson, 1980a). The question remains if conceptual metaphorical mapping is indeed uniquely human or if it appears in other primates and thus describes a conceptual metaphorical mapping that predates language. To answer this question, we examined if our evolutionary closest relatives, the chimpanzees, have conceptual metaphors as we humans do. We sequentially presented a cue (individual 1, 750 ms) followed by an inter-stimulus interval (500 ms) and two vertically arranged stimuli (match: individual 1; distractor: individual 2) (Figure 1A,B). The chimpanzees were required to indicate which of the two simultaneously presented faces (match, distractor) corresponds to the initially presented face (cue) in identity by touching one of the faces. Note that the participants did not classify the stimuli based on social rank. In addition to coherent and incoherent combinations of stimulus and position, we included a neutral condition combining two pictures of closely ranked individuals in a trial (close condition). In the first step of analyses, we pooled response latencies for coherence (coherent vs incoherent vs close) and position (high vs low). Using a mixed model ANOVA with coherence and position as fixed factors, we found a main effect for coherence (F(2, 30) = 5, m.s.e. = 1.10e+004, p<0.001), but not for position (p>0.34) or the interaction between the two factors (p>0.83) (Figure 1C). Post-hoc t-tests (Bonferroni-corrected for multiple comparisons) revealed a significant response facilitation for coherent as opposed to incoherent trials (t(10) = -3.20, m.s.e. = 8.60e+003, p<0.01 [one-tailed]) and close trials (t(10) = −1.92, m.s.e. = 1.14e+004, p<0.05 [one-tailed]). However, there was no significant deterioration for incoherent compared to close trials (p>0.11) (Figure 1C). In the second step of analyses, we pooled response latencies for position (high vs low) and compared the differences of coherent and incoherent trials in one-sample t-tests. We found significant deviations from zero for the high position (t(5) = 16.64, m.s.e. = 1.11e+004, p<0.001 [one-tailed]) and for the low position (t(5) = 20.13, m.s.e. = 6.88e+003, p<0.001 [one-tailed]) (Figure 1F). Further, there was no significant difference between the positions high and low (p>0.55).10.7554/eLife.00932.003Figure 1.Task sequence, example stimuli and response latency analyses.(A) Typical trial sequence. (B) Stimulus exemplars. (C) Average response latencies for coherent, incoherent and close trials (mean ± SEM) for all participants, (D) for high-ranked participants and (E) for low-ranked participants. (F) Average response latency differences (coherent-incoherent) for high and low positions. (C, F) The number of independent data points (N) is six for each condition. (G) Normalized frequency distribution of response latencies of high- and low-ranked participants for coherent, incoherent and close trials. (H) Sensitivity index for both stimulus sets and stimuli. Positive values indicate facilitation for coherent relative to incoherent trials.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.00932.003 We showed that in chimpanzees discrimination performances between familiar conspecific faces are systematically modulated by the location and the social status of the presented individuals, leading to discrimination facilitation or deterioration. Coherent arrangements as opposed to incoherent arrangements led to a facilitation of recognition. Further, both, a high-ranked individual at the higher position and a low-ranked individual at the lower position caused recognition facilitation equivalently. Importantly, the participants were not trained on discriminating the ranks of the presented individuals. Instead, they were substantially affected by the rank while discriminating the identity of those individuals. The modulations are in accordance with a spatial arrangement representing high-ranked individuals at the top and low-ranked individuals at the bottom, hence reflecting the inverse function of response latencies and spatial distance of two individuals on the display and in the mental hierarchy space of the participants. Six chimpanzees (Pan troglodytes; 1 male juvenile, 2 female juveniles [both around 11 years] and 3 female adults [both around 31 years]) participated in this study. The chimpanzees live in groups of 14 individuals with access to environmentally enriched outdoor (770 m2) as well as indoor compounds. The chimpanzees participated in a variety of computer-controlled tasks in the past (Matsuzawa, 2003; Matsuzawa et al., 2006). They are experienced in horizontally aligned delayed matching-to-sample (DMS) tasks; however, they are inexperienced in a vertical version of a DMS task. Effects of training in the vertically aligned DMS task can be ruled out.
Conceptual metaphors are linguistic constructions. Such a metaphor is humans’ mental representation of social rank as a pyramidal-like structure. High-ranked individuals are represented in higher positions than low-ranked individuals. We show that conceptual metaphorical mapping between social rank and the representational domain exists in our closest evolutionary relatives, the chimpanzees. Chimpanzee participants were requested to discriminate face identities in a vertical arrangement. We found a modulation of response latencies by the rank of the presented individual and the position on the display: a high-ranked individual presented in the higher and a low-ranked individual in the lower position led to quicker identity discrimination than a high-ranked individual in the lower and a low-ranked individual in the higher position. Such a spatial representation of dominance hierarchy in chimpanzees suggests that a natural tendency to systematically map an abstract dimension exists in the common ancestor of humans and chimpanzees.
It is thought that the ability to connect an abstract concept to something physical helps us to understand abstract ideas more easily. Examples include the use of conceptual metaphors that draw parallels between something abstract, such as social status, and physical position, even though there is no connection between them: familiar examples include phrases such as ‘top dog’ or ‘upper class’. It has long been assumed that the use of such conceptual metaphors is uniquely human.