 The discovery of bona fide synapses formed on non-neuronal NG2-expressing cells (Bergles et al., 2000), the progenitors of myelinating oligodendrocytes, has challenged the dogma that synapses are a unique feature of neurons in the central nervous system. Since then, the existence of functional synapses between neurons and NG2 cells is recognized as a major physiological feature of these cells throughout the brain (Maldonado and Angulo, 2014). In the somatosensory cortex, NG2 cells receive a major synaptic input from local GABAergic interneurons that disappears after the second postnatal (PN) week (Vélez-Fort et al., 2010; Balia et al., 2015). Cortical NG2 cells are, therefore, believed to be transiently embedded in GABAergic microcircuits at a period known to undergo oligodendrocyte differentiation in the neocortex (Baracskay et al., 2002). However, while the connectivity patterns between neocortical interneurons and their neuronal partners begin to be elucidated (Fino and Yuste, 2011; Pfeffer et al., 2013), the rules governing the GABAergic innervation of NG2 cells in the network are elusive. To test whether NG2 cells are wired by interneurons in a specific manner, we searched for presynaptic and postsynaptic principles governing individual interneuron-NG2 cell synapses. We performed paired recordings between layer V Venus+ interneurons and DsRed+ NG2 cells in acute somatosensory cortical slices of VGAT-Venus;NG2-DsRed mice from PN8 to PN13 (Figure 1A—figure supplement 1A). Paired recordings allowed us to characterize the action potential firing behavior of the interneuron, the characteristic conductance profile of the NG2 cell, and the specific synaptic properties of the connection (Figure 1A—figure supplement 1B-G; see ‘Materials and methods’). In 38 out of 147 pairs, action currents elicited in presynaptic interneurons induced inward postsynaptic currents (PSCs) sensitive to the GABAAR antagonist SR95531 in NG2 cells recorded with a CsCl-based intracellular solution (Figure 1A—figure supplement 1D). All unitary connections displayed currents with small amplitudes and showed paired-pulse depression without recovery within 250 ms (Figure 1A—figure supplement 1D-G). Our findings uncover both spatially and temporally structured interneuron-NG2 cell connections, from the subcellular level to the cortical network during a critical period of NG2 cell differentiation. We demonstrate that NG2 cells form a transient and highly organized network with interneurons that is characterized by a high-connection probability at PN10, a specific distribution of synaptic inputs on cell bodies and branches, a restricted number of contacts per interneuron, and very local connectivity maps. GABAergic innervation of NG2 cells, thus, appears as a finely regulated process that follows its own logic, which cannot be inferred from previous studies on NG2 cells and on classical neuronal synapses. All experiments followed European Union and institutional guidelines for the care and use of laboratory animals. Acute parasagittal slices (300 µm) of the barrel cortex with an angle of 10° to the sagittal plane were obtained from a double VGAT-Venus;NG2-DsRed transgenic mouse (Ziskin et al., 2007; Wang et al., 2009), as previously described (Vélez-Fort et al., 2010). Excitation light to visualize Venus and DsRed fluorescent proteins was provided by Optoled Light Sources (Blue and Green Optoleds; Cairn Research, UK), and images were collected with an iXon+ 14-bit digital camera (Andor Technology, UK) through an Olympus BX51 microscope equipped with a 40× fluorescent water-immersion objective. Excitation and emission wavelengths were obtained by using, respectively, 470- and 525-nm filters for Venus and 560- and 620-nm filters for DsRed. The Imaging Workbench 6.0 software (Indec Biosystems, USA) was utilized to acquire and store images for off-line analysis. Patch-clamp recordings were performed at RT or 33°C using an extracellular solution containing (in mM): 126 NaCl, 2.5 KCl, 1.25 NaH2PO4, 26 NaHCO3, 20 glucose, 5 pyruvate, 3 CaCl2, and 1 MgCl2 (95% O2, 5% CO2). NG2 cells were recorded with different intracellular solutions according to the experiment and containing (in mM): either 130 CsCl or 125 CsCH3SO3H (CsMeS), 5 4-aminopyridine, 10 tetraethylammonium chloride, 0.2 EGTA, 0.5 CaCl2, 2 MgCl2, 10 HEPES, 2 Na2-ATP, 0.2 Na-GTP, and 10 Na2-phosphocreatine (pH ≈ 7.3). Presynaptic interneurons were recorded with an intracellular solution containing (in mM): 130 K-gluconate (KGlu), 10 GABA, 0.1 EGTA, 0.5 CaCl2, 2 MgCl2, 10 HEPES, 2 Na2-ATP, 0.2 Na-GTP, and 10 Na2-phosphocreatine (pH ≈ 7.3). Potentials were corrected for a junction potential of −10 mV when using CsMeS and KGlu-based intracellular solutions. Whole-cell recordings were obtained using Multiclamp 700B, filtered at 4 kHz, and digitized at 20 kHz. Digitized data were analyzed off-line using pClamp10.1 software (Molecular Devices), Neuromatic package (http://www.neuromatic.thinkrandom.com/) and Spacan (http://www.spacan.net) within IGOR Pro 6.0 environment (Wavemetrics, USA). Na+ current densities and frequency of spontaneous synaptic activity were analyzed as we previously described (Vélez-Fort et al., 2010; Balia et al., 2015).
NG2 cells, oligodendrocyte progenitors, receive a major synaptic input from interneurons in the developing neocortex. It is presumed that these precursors integrate cortical networks where they act as sensors of neuronal activity. We show that NG2 cells of the developing somatosensory cortex form a transient and structured synaptic network with interneurons that follows its own rules of connectivity. Fast-spiking interneurons, highly connected to NG2 cells, target proximal subcellular domains containing GABAA receptors with γ2 subunits. Conversely, non-fast-spiking interneurons, poorly connected with these progenitors, target distal sites lacking this subunit. In the network, interneuron-NG2 cell connectivity maps exhibit a local spatial arrangement reflecting innervation only by the nearest interneurons. This microcircuit architecture shows a connectivity peak at PN10, coinciding with a switch to massive oligodendrocyte differentiation. Hence, GABAergic innervation of NG2 cells is temporally and spatially regulated from the subcellular to the network level in coordination with the onset of oligodendrogenesis.
Neurons are outnumbered in the brain by cells called glial cells. The brain contains various types of glial cells that perform a range of different jobs, including the supply of nutrients and the removal of dead neurons. The role of glial cells called oligodendrocytes is to produce a material called myelin: this is an electrical insulator that, when wrapped around a neuron, increases the speed at which electrical impulses can travel through the nervous system.