 The study of decision making in the brain is often limited by the need to average over repeated trials. Yet if the decision process differs on different trials, we may miss the very events that would be most enlightening. To detect such events requires a moment-by-moment (Briggman et al., 2005; Yu et al., 2009) readout of brain states on single trials (Churchland et al., 2007; Afshar et al., 2011). We employed a novel decision-making variant of the previously described maze task (Churchland et al., 2010; Kaufman et al., 2013, 2014). Monkeys (J and N) touched and fixated a central spot, then were shown two targets and four virtual barriers (Figure 1A). The monkeys were required to remain still and maintain eye fixation until a Go cue was given following a 0-1000 ms exponentially distributed delay (Figure 1B). Two barrier configurations were used: ‘T-maze’ (Figure 1C) and ‘S-maze’ (Figure 1D). In each configuration, two ‘key barriers’ appeared in one of three lengths making the nearby target easy (shown as dark gray in Figure 1C,D), hard (medium gray in Figure 1C,D), or inaccessible (light gray in Figure 1C,D). Either key barrier could change difficulty at a random point in the trial (∼58% of trials). At most one change was made per trial.10.7554/eLife.04677.003Figure 1.Decision-maze task.(A) Illustration of task setup. Two targets were presented along with four virtual barriers and a frame. The monkey performed the task with a cursor projected above his fingertip. Targets were rewarded equally. The cursor left a white trail on the screen. (B) Task timeline. (C and D) The two families of mazes used: ‘T-maze’ (C) and ‘S-maze’ (D). Key barriers could take one of three positions, making each target easy, difficult, or blocked (shown here as shades of gray). Reaches for trials with ≥300 ms delay shown. Faded colors, reach trajectories on forced choice trials; saturated colors, reach trajectories on free choice trials. (E and F) Overt changes of mind on free-choice trials with no barrier changes. Dataset J1 (A-E); dataset N3 (F).DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.04677.00310.7554/eLife.04677.004Figure 1—figure supplement 1.Overt changes of mind for the other five datasets (labeled on panels).Displayed as in Figure 1E,F.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.04677.004 While changes of mind have been hypothesized to occur during decision making, and have even been observed when sensory evidence changes (Horwitz and Newsome, 2001; Bollimunta et al., 2012; Kiani et al., 2014; Thura and Cisek, 2014), little has been known about how decisions proceed during truly free choices. Here, we trained monkeys to perform a novel task that often presented two viable options with either answer resulting in the same reward. We then examined the dynamics of decision making using single-trial, moment-by-moment decoding of preparatory activity from PMd and M1. We found that motor plans for forced-choice and free-choice trials were typically similar and formed with similar speed. However, as suspected, these plans were sometimes revised later. These changes of mind were essentially never observed when the animal was presented with forced choices; this internal process was specific to free choices. Animal protocols were approved by the Stanford University Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. Subjects were two adult male macaque monkeys (Macaca mulatta), J and N, trained to perform a delayed reach task on a fronto-parallel screen for juice reward. Use of two monkeys is standard practice in the field. The surgical history of the monkeys has been described previously (Churchland et al., 2010, 2012); briefly, they were implanted with a head restraint and two 96-electrode silicon arrays (Blackrock Microsystems, Salt Lake City, UT) in surface M1 and caudal PMd of both monkeys (estimated from local anatomical landmarks). Both monkeys performed the task with their right arm, and the arrays were implanted in the left hemisphere.
When choosing actions, we can act decisively, vacillate, or suffer momentary indecision. Studying how individual decisions unfold requires moment-by-moment readouts of brain state. Here we provide such a view from dorsal premotor and primary motor cortex. Two monkeys performed a novel decision task while we recorded from many neurons simultaneously. We found that a decoder trained using ‘forced choices’ (one target viable) was highly reliable when applied to ‘free choices’. However, during free choices internal events formed three categories. Typically, neural activity was consistent with rapid, unwavering choices. Sometimes, though, we observed presumed ‘changes of mind’: the neural state initially reflected one choice before changing to reflect the final choice. Finally, we observed momentary ‘indecision’: delay forming any clear motor plan. Further, moments of neural indecision accompanied moments of behavioral indecision. Together, these results reveal the rich and diverse set of internal events long suspected to occur during free choice.
Some decisions are easy to make. We know almost immediately what outcome we want to achieve and what actions are required to do so. But other decisions involve more deliberation: there may be more factors to consider or more at stake, or the best course of action may simply not be immediately apparent. Under such circumstances, we may hesitate, waver or even change our minds completely.