 The trophic factors, neurotrophin-3 (Ntf3) and brain-derived neurotrophic factor (Bbnf) play critical roles in the embryonic inner ear, contributing to the survival of cochlear and vestibular sensory neurons and to the establishment of their projections into the respective sensory epithelia (Fritzsch et al., 2004; Ramekers et al., 2012). Both Bdnf and Ntf3 continue to be expressed in inner ear sensory epithelia after birth. In the postnatal vestibular epithelia, Bdnf is expressed only by supporting cells (Schecterson and Bothwell, 1994; Montcouquiol et al., 1998), whereas Ntf3 is expressed by both supporting cells and hair cells (Farinas et al., 1994). In the postnatal organ of Corti, Bdnf is expressed by both inner (IHCs) and outer hair cells (OHCs) and supporting cells at early postnatal ages (P1-P6), but is only detected in supporting cells from P10 onwards (Wiechers et al., 1999). All cells in the early postnatal organ of Corti appear to express Ntf3, but in the adult, expression is restricted to the IHCs and their surrounding supporting cells, with higher levels in the apical (low-frequency) region than at the base of the cochlear spiral (Sugawara et al., 2007). Thus Bdnf and Ntf3 could have significant functions in the postnatal inner ear, and alterations in expression of these neurotrophins may modulate structure and function in the adult inner ear. To alter neurotrophin expression by supporting cells, we used a mouse line that expresses the tamoxifen-inducible Cre recombinase (CreERT) under the control of the proteolipid protein 1 promoter (Plp1/CreERT). We previously showed that this line can be used to induce effective gene recombination in inner ear supporting cells, when tamoxifen is delivered at early postnatal ages (Gomez-Casati et al., 2010a). We crossed Plp1/CreERT with mice carrying a conditional Ntf3 knockout allele (Ntf3flox) (Bates et al., 1999) or an overexpression transgene (Ntf3stop) to eliminate or increase the expression of Ntf3, respectively. Neurotrophins are key molecular mediators for synaptic development and function in the central nervous system (Gomez-Palacio-Schjetnan and Escobar, 2013). In this study, we show that Ntf3 and Bdnf, which are necessary for sensory neuron survival in the developing inner ear (Fritzsch et al., 2004; Ramekers et al., 2012), continue to play important and complementary roles in the postnatal inner ear, specifically by modulating the number of synapses between hair cells and sensory neurons. Our results indicate that supporting cells of the sensory epithelia are the key source of these neurotrophins in the postnatal inner ear. Importantly, we show that increasing the availability of Ntf3, but not Bdnf, promotes the recovery of both cochlear responses and IHC synapses after acoustic trauma, even when Ntf3 expression is induced after noise exposure. Plp1/CreERT (Doerflinger et al., 2003), Slc1a3/CreERT (Wang et al., 2012), Bdnfflox (Rios et al., 2001), Ntf3flox (Bates et al., 1999), and Rosa26tdTomato reporter mice (Madisen et al., 2010) were obtained from Jackson Laboratory. The Bdnfstop mouse line was provided by Rudolf Jaenisch (Chang et al., 2006). To generate the Ntf3stop mouse, we engineered the conditional Ntf3 overexpression transgene using the mouse Ntf3 cDNA (kindly provided by Barbara Hempstead, Cornell University) under regulation by the synthetic CAGGS promoter/enhancer/intron followed by a loxP-STOP-loxP cassette (kindly provided by Laurie Jackson-Grusby, Children's Hospital Boston). Briefly, a loxP-STOP-loxP cassette was cloned immediately upstream of the Ntf3 cDNA present in a Bluescript plasmid. A SacI/KpnI fragment containing the mouse Ntf3 cDNA and the loxP-STOP-loxP cassette was cut out from the plasmid, blunt-ended, and ligated with an EcoRI cut/blunt-ended pCAGGSTurbo-cre vector to generate pCAGGS-loxP-STOP-loxP Ntf3. A PstI fragment containing an ATG-FRT site was cut out from the pPGK-ATG-FRT (no EcoRI) vector and subcloned into the PstI site, 3′ of the CAGGS-loxP-STOP-loxP Ntf3 construct. The whole pCAGGS-loxP-STOP-loxP Ntf3-ATG-FRT plasmid was targeted downstream of the collagen 1a1 locus by frt/Flpase-mediated site-specific integration. To generate Pou4f3/CreERT mice, an 8.6-kb Pou4f3 (Brn3.1) regulatory sequence (Sage et al., 2006) was cut out from pSP73-Pou4f3-alpha9 plasmid using SalI (kindly provided by Doug Vetter, Tuffs University). The SP73-alpha9 fragment was re-ligated and digested with SmaI to remove alpha9 cDNA from SP73 backbone. The CreERT coding sequence (Feil et al., 1996) was obtained from EcoRI digestion of pCreERt plasmid (kindly provided by Laurie Jackson-Grusby), blunted and ligated to SP73 backbone. SP73-CreERT vector was then cut with SalI and re-ligated with Pou4f3 regulatory region. The final plasmid (14.4-kb) was digested with FspI and SbfI to release the 13-kb fragment containing Pou4f3/CreERT transgene, which is then purified for microinjection. Both Ntf3stop and Pou4f3/CreERT mice were generated at Mouse Gene Manipulation Facility at Children's Hospital Boston.
Neurotrophin-3 (Ntf3) and brain derived neurotrophic factor (Bdnf) are critical for sensory neuron survival and establishment of neuronal projections to sensory epithelia in the embryonic inner ear, but their postnatal functions remain poorly understood. Using cell-specific inducible gene recombination in mice we found that, in the postnatal inner ear, Bbnf and Ntf3 are required for the formation and maintenance of hair cell ribbon synapses in the vestibular and cochlear epithelia, respectively. We also show that supporting cells in these epithelia are the key endogenous source of the neurotrophins. Using a new hair cell CreERT line with mosaic expression, we also found that Ntf3's effect on cochlear synaptogenesis is highly localized. Moreover, supporting cell-derived Ntf3, but not Bbnf, promoted recovery of cochlear function and ribbon synapse regeneration after acoustic trauma. These results indicate that glial-derived neurotrophins play critical roles in inner ear synapse density and synaptic regeneration after injury.
Noise-induced hearing loss is common, and can result from prolonged exposure to moderate levels of noise that are not perceived as painful or even unpleasant. Some hearing loss can be attributed to the death of hair cells in a part of the inner ear called the cochlea. When sound waves hit the cochlea, they cause the fluid inside it to vibrate: the hair cells detect these vibrations and convert them into electrical signals that are sent along neurons to the brain. However, vibrations that are too strong can destroy hair cells.