 Event-related potential (ERP) represents the stereotypical response of the electroencephalogram (EEG) activity to an internal or external stimulus, and reflects reproducible and highly coherent large-scale activity patterns in the underlying cerebral cortical network (Davis, 1939; Rohrbaugh et al., 1990; Luck, 2005a; Luck and Kappenman, 2012). ERPs have been widely used in both healthy and neuropsychiatric conditions as robust physiological indices of cognitive functions because the amplitudes of late ERP components are modulated by various cognitive functions including attention (Hillyard and Kutas, 1983; Näätänen, 1988; Schreiber et al., 1992; Iragui et al., 1993; Polich, 1997; Herrmann and Knight, 2001; Barry et al., 2003; Caravaglios et al., 2008; Luck and Kappenman, 2012). We first developed a rat version of the auditory oddball task commonly used in human ERP studies, with the goal of reproducing characteristic ERP responses. In the auditory oddball task (Figure 1A), a standard tone (10 kHz) was presented once every 2 s, and occasionally once every 6-14 s a deviant oddball tone (6 kHz) was presented instead. Adult Long Evans rats (n = 8) were trained to discriminate the standard tone from the oddball tone that signaled the availability of liquid reward. After training, rats showed high hit rates toward the oddball tone and a low false alarm rate toward the standard tone (Figure 1B).10.7554/eLife.02148.003Figure 1.The frontal ERP in an auditory oddball task is behaviorally relevant and functionally coupled with BF bursting.(A) In the auditory oddball task, a standard tone (10 kHz) was presented once every 2 s, and occasionally once every 6-14 s a deviant oddball tone (6 kHz) was presented that signaled reward if responded to within a 3-s window (yellow). (B) Behavioral performance in the oddball task from eight rats (mean ± SEM). (C) Grand-average ERPs in the frontal cortex relative to tone onsets in three trial types, plotted separately while rats actively performed the oddball task or when the tones were presented passively without any reward. (D) The frontal ERP in hit trials from eight individual sessions (six rats). Sessions were sorted by peak ERP latency, the same as in (E) and (G). (E) Frontal ERP amplitude reliably discriminated hit from miss responses to the oddball tone in individual sessions, calculated based on signal detection theory. Only bins reaching statistical significance (p<0.01) were plotted. (F) Grand-average of BF bursting response relative to tone onsets in three trial types. BF bursting occurred at the same time window as the frontal ERP, and showed similar amplitude modulation between trial types. (G) Population BF bursting response in hit trials from the same eight sessions.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.02148.00310.7554/eLife.02148.004Figure 1—figure supplement 1.ERP in the frontal cortex, but not the primary visual cortex, provides information about behavioral performance.(A) Grand-average ERPs relative to tone onset in three trial types, plotted separately for the frontal cortex (same as in Figure 1C) and the primary visual cortex (V1). V1 ERP was recorded as a control site to illustrate the specificity of the frontal ERP, as well as for studying processing of visual stimuli in related experiments. (B) Frontal ERP amplitude reliably discriminated oddball from standard tone trials in individual sessions, calculated based on signal detection theory. Only bins reaching statistical significance (p<0.01) were plotted. Conventions and the order of sessions (n = 8) are the same as in Figure 1E. (C) Single session V1 ERP in hit trials (7 sessions from 6 rats), sorted in the same session order as in (B). V1 EEG signal from one session, corresponding to the third from the top in (B), was contaminated with excessive movement artifact and removed from this analysis. (D-E) V1 ERP amplitude provided little information about hit vs miss responses in oddball trials (D), or information about oddball vs standard trials (E). Conventions as in (B).DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.02148.00410.7554/eLife.02148.005Figure 1—figure supplement 2.BF electrode locations and the classification of BF bursting neurons.(A) Each set of color boxes represent the locations of bilateral BF electrode bundle in one rat (n = 8). BF electrodes were located between −0.12 mm-−0.84 mm relative to Bregma throughout multiple subregions, including the ventral part of globus pallidus (GP), ventral pallidum (VP), substantia innominata (SI), nucleus basalis of Meynert (NBM, or B), magnocellular preoptic nucleus (MCPO) and horizontal limb of the diagonal band (HDB). This widespread spatial distribution of BF bursting neurons is consistent with the location of cortically-projecting BF neurons as revealed by placing retrograde tracers in the prefrontal cortex (Gritti et al., 1997). (B) PSTHs of all 168 BF neurons in response to oddball tone onset in hit trials. BF neurons were sorted by their bursting index, defined as the ratio of the bursting amplitude (average firing rate in the [50, 200] msec window) over the average firing rate in the entire session. Bursting index of 2.5 (indicated by the white dashed line) was used as the cutoff for classifying BF bursting neurons. (C) Scatter plot of the baseline firing rate vs bursting amplitude for all BF neurons. Each dot represents one BF neuron. The red dashed line indicates the 2.5 bursting index cutoff used for classifying BF bursting neurons.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.02148.005 ERP is one of the oldest and also most widely used methods in neuroscience research (Davis, 1939; Rohrbaugh et al., 1990; Luck, 2005a; Luck and Kappenman, 2012). Contrary to the common belief that cognitive ERPs are generated by local activity within the cerebral cortex, we found that a frontal ERP response closely linked to behavioral performance in the auditory oddball task (Figure 1) is tightly coupled with BF bursting activity in single trials in terms of both amplitude (Figure 2) and timing (Figure 3). The coupling between BF bursting and the frontal ERP remains invariant in the face of different types of stimulus (oddball vs standard) and behavioral response (hit vs miss). The frontal ERP is likely generated by the underlying layer-specific LFP response, which is similarly coupled with BF bursting activity (Figure 4). BF electrical stimulation reproduces the key features of LFP responses in the oddball task (Figure 5), suggesting that the BF bursting activity is sufficient to generate and account for most of the frontal ERP response in the oddball task. The BF bursting activity therefore provides a novel neural correlate of the frontal ERP response. This is the first time, to the best of our knowledge, that a key component of cognitive ERPs has been linked to the activity of a well-defined neuronal population located outside of the cerebral cortex. These findings highlight the important and previously unrecognized role of long-range subcortical inputs from the BF in generating cognitive ERPs. Eight male Long Evans rats (Charles River, NC), aged 3-6 months and weighing 300-400 grams at the start of the experiment, were used for this experiment. Rats were housed under 12/12 day/night cycle with ad libitum access to rodent chow and water in environmentally controlled conditions. During training and recording procedures, rats were mildly water restricted to their 90% weight and were trained in a daily session of 60-90 min in length, five days a week. Rats received 15 min water access at the end of each training day with free access on weekends. All experimental procedures were conducted in accordance with the National Institutes of Health (NIH) Guide for Care and Use of Laboratory Animals and approved by the National Institute on Aging Animal Care and Use Committee.
Event-related potentials (ERPs) are widely used in both healthy and neuropsychiatric conditions as physiological indices of cognitive functions. Contrary to the common belief that cognitive ERPs are generated by local activity within the cerebral cortex, here we show that an attention-related ERP in the frontal cortex is correlated with, and likely generated by, subcortical inputs from the basal forebrain (BF). In rats performing an auditory oddball task, both the amplitude and timing of the frontal ERP were coupled with BF neuronal activity in single trials. The local field potentials (LFPs) associated with the frontal ERP, concentrated in deep cortical layers corresponding to the zone of BF input, were similarly coupled with BF activity and consistently triggered by BF electrical stimulation within 5-10 msec. These results highlight the important and previously unrecognized role of long-range subcortical inputs from the BF in the generation of cognitive ERPs.
The vertebrate nervous system coordinates an animal’s involuntary and voluntary actions, and is responsible for transmitting signals between different parts of the body. Two different cell types, glial cells and neurons, make up the nervous system: glial cells play a metabolic or structural role, whereas neurons are responsible for physically transmitting the signals. Signals are sent quickly and precisely between neurons in the form of electrochemical waves, and it is this electrical activity that allows researchers to measure and study the communication of signals throughout the body.