 Retinal images of the environment are altered by self-generated rotations such as eye or head movements. In order to perceive the world accurately, the component of retinal patterns resulting from such rotations needs to be discounted by the visual system. How the brain achieves such a rotation-invariant visual representation of the world remains unclear. Visually guided navigation is an important context in which achieving rotation-invariance is critical for accurate behavior (Gibson, 1950; Warren and Saunders, 1995; Grigo and Lappe, 1999). For example, while walking down a sidewalk and simultaneously looking at a passing car using eye or head rotations, the brain must discount the visual consequences of the self-generated rotations to estimate and maintain one's direction of translation (i.e., heading). To investigate the effect of rotations on the visual heading tuning of VIP neurons, we presented visual stimuli simulating eight directions of translation in the horizontal plane (Figure 1C) and two directions of rotation (Figure 1D). To evaluate the relative roles of visual and non-visual cues, rotations were introduced in the form of either ‘real’ or ‘simulated’ pursuit eye movements. During real pursuit (RP, Figure 1E, left), the monkey smoothly tracked a target moving across the screen such that both visual and non-visual rotation cues were present. During simulated pursuit (SP, Figure 1E, right), the visual motion stimulus accurately simulated a combination of translation and eye rotation while the monkey fixated a stationary target at the center of the display (non-visual cues were absent). In order to provide a rich visual environment, the first experiment simulated self-motion through a 3D cloud of dots, a stimulus that contains both local motion parallax cues resulting from translation (Helmholtz and Southall, 1924; Gibson, 1950; Longuet-Higgins and Prazdny, 1980; Koenderink and van Doorn, 1987) and global perspective cues to rotation (Koenderink and van Doorn, 1976; Grigo and Lappe, 1999). To further explore the underpinnings of a retinal solution in achieving rotation-invariance, a second experiment used a fronto-parallel plane (FP) of dots, which eliminates the local motion parallax cues but retains global perspective cues to rotation. We evaluated how heading is represented in macaque area VIP in the presence of rotations, finding that a sub-population of VIP neurons represent heading in a rotation-invariant fashion while a majority of the population is at least partially tolerant to rotations. Importantly, rotation invariance can be achieved using both non-visual and purely visual cues. Previous neurophysiology literature emphasized the importance of non-visual cues, especially efference copy signals, but clear evidence for the role of visual cues has been missing, as discussed below. In contrast, our study provides novel evidence for the role of visual cues in discounting rotations and representing heading. Furthermore, we show that both local motion parallax and global dynamic perspective visual cues present in optic flow play a significant role in decomposing the components of self-motion. The importance of visual signals is reinforced by our finding that VIP neurons also carry rotation signals derived from purely visual cues. The significant correlation between visual and non-visual rotation responses is consistent with a multi-sensory representation of rotations. In addition, we resolve an important ambiguity in the literature between the concepts of tolerance to rotations and reference frames. Specifically, we examine the effect of a rotating eye reference frame on visual responses to show that rotation tolerance does not necessarily imply a head-centered reference frame. Our findings show conclusively that visual cues play a significant role in achieving rotation-invariant heading representations. Two adult rhesus monkeys (Macaca mulatta), weighing 8-10 kg, were chronically implanted with a circular molded, lightweight plastic ring for head restraint and a scleral coil for monitoring eye movements (see Gu et al., 2006; Fetsch et al., 2007; Takahashi et al., 2007 for more detail). Following recovery from surgery, the monkeys were trained to sit head restrained in a primate chair. They were subsequently trained using standard operant conditioning to fixate and pursue a small visual target for liquid rewards, as described below. All surgical materials and methods were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committees at Washington University and Baylor College of Medicine, and were in accordance with NIH guidelines.
As we navigate through the world, eye and head movements add rotational velocity patterns to the retinal image. When such rotations accompany observer translation, the rotational velocity patterns must be discounted to accurately perceive heading. The conventional view holds that this computation requires efference copies of self-generated eye/head movements. Here we demonstrate that the brain implements an alternative solution in which retinal velocity patterns are themselves used to dissociate translations from rotations. These results reveal a novel role for visual cues in achieving a rotation-invariant representation of heading in the macaque ventral intraparietal area. Specifically, we show that the visual system utilizes both local motion parallax cues and global perspective distortions to estimate heading in the presence of rotations. These findings further suggest that the brain is capable of performing complex computations to infer eye movements and discount their sensory consequences based solely on visual cues.
When strolling along a path beside a busy street, we can look around without losing our stride. The things we see change as we walk forward, and our view also changes if we turn our head—for example, to look at a passing car. Nevertheless, we can still tell that we are walking in a straight-line because our brain is able to compute the direction in which we are heading by discounting the visual changes caused by rotating our head or eyes.