 The brain estimates the location of an object in visual space by reading out which retinal ganglion cells (RGCs) respond to it. This ‘retinotopic map’ is preserved through the visual pathway and is used to guide behaviour (Hubel and Wiesel, 1962; Malpeli and Baker, 1975; Bonin et al., 2011). There is, however, a problem to overcome when this map is used to estimate the position of a moving object: the slow speed with which photoreceptors convert light into an electrical signal causes RGCs to respond ∼70 ms after an object first appears (Baylor and Hodgkin, 1974). During this delay, a tennis ball served by a professional player will have travelled ∼3-4 m. The fact that the position of the ball can be estimated precisely enough to meet it with a racquet demonstrates that the visual system is able to overcome the phototransduction delay for moving stimuli. Together, these computations are termed motion anticipation, and they begin in the inner retina (Berry et al., 1999): when a stimulus is moving, the peak-firing rate of retinal ganglion cells (RGCs) occurs earlier than expected from the delayed response to a flashed stimulus. This correction supports accurate target tracking in salamander (Leonardo and Meister, 2013). The basic phenomenon of motion anticipation is demonstrated in Figure 1, where we recorded extracellular spikes from individual RGCs in retinal flat-mounts from goldfish. The receptive field (RF) of each ganglion cell was mapped using bars flashed in a random order across the retina (Johnston et al., 2014), and then a bar was flashed onto the centre of the receptive field: the delay to peak firing averaged 62 ± 3 ms, largely reflecting the delay in phototransduction (Baylor and Hodgkin, 1974) (n = 25; Figure 1A,C). But when the same bar (−100% contrast; 160 µm wide, equivalent to 2.4° of visual angle) was moved across the retina at 500 μm s−1 (7.5° s−1), the peak spike rate occurred 46 ± 13 ms (n = 25) before the leading edge reached the receptive field centre and then activity decayed before the bar left (Figure 1B,C). The time at which a RGC responded most strongly therefore encoded the anticipated position of the bar in retinotopic space (Berry et al., 1999) (Figure 1B,C). Motion anticipation was observed across many functional types of ganglion cell, including brisk-transient, brisk-sustained and orientation selective cells. RGCs with larger RFs tended to display greater anticipation, with RF size accounting for 35% of the observed variance in the delays for motion (Pearson's r = −0.593, n = 25, Figure 1D). The three cells that failed to show any motion anticipation also had the smallest RF size.10.7554/eLife.06250.003Figure 1.Motion anticipation in the retina is not due to a gain change in bipolar cells.(A) An example of two ganglion cells responding to a bar flashed on their receptive field centres for 100 ms (−100% contrast). (B) The response of the same cells to a bar of width 160 µm (2.4º) moving at 500 µm s−1 (7.5º s−1). The position of the bar relative to a cell's receptive field is shown above for the different time points indicated by the lettered arrows. (C) A comparison of the delay for the maximal response to a flashed stimulus (62 ± 2.6 ms) and the time of maximal spiking to a moving stimulus relative to the time at which the stimulus reached the centre of the RF (−46 ± 12.6 ms; n = 25 ganglion cells; p < 0.0001). BT = Brisk-transient, BS = Brisk Sustained, OS = Orientation-selective, see ‘Materials and methods’ for cell classification. (D) The degree of motion anticipation was correlated with the RF size (Pearson's r = −0.593, n = 25). (E) Schematic of retinal feedback circuits in the inner plexiform layer (IPL), excitation and inhibition are represented by green and red arrows respectively. (F) Schematic of feed-forward inhibition in the IPL. (G) The dynamics of the EPSC evoked by a −100% contrast bar flashed over the RGCs RF centre for 320 ms. Individual cells were normalised before averaging (n = 12, SEM in grey). (H) Example of the EPSC recorded as a bar moves across the receptive field of an OFF ganglion cell (average of six presentations). The peak EPSC lags behind the receptive field centre by 79 ± 17 μm (1.2 ± 0.3º, n = 7). The purple line indicates the expected linear response obtained from convolution of the receptive field with the EPSC in F. The motion evoked EPSC was not significantly different from the expected linear response, indicating that lateral inhibition is not present (using the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test, n = 7). (I) Orientation selective cells did show a clear indication of lateral inhibition (n = 2).DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.06250.003 This study demonstrates how the retina compensates for the slow speed of phototransduction so that the neural image transmitted to the brain conveys information about the present position of a moving object rather than its position ∼70 ms in the recent past. The fundamental observation is that motion anticipation arises from the passive interactions of excitatory and inhibitory inputs within the dendritic tree and three general properties of the retinal connectome: the excess of inhibitory over excitatory inputs in RGC dendrites, the average density of these inputs and their random distribution over the whole dendritic tree. All procedures were carried out in accordance with the UK Animals (Scientific Procedures) act 1986. Retinae were removed from goldfish (15-20 cm long) and placed in AMES solution (Sigma-Aldrich, Gillingham, UK) diluted to 270 mOsM. Pieces of retina ∼1 cm−2 were mounted photoreceptor side down in a recording chamber and perfused at 2-3 ml min−1 with AMES bubbled with 95% CO2/5% 02. Retinal ganglion cells were visualized under infrared light using a camera and recordings made with an Axopatch 200B (Molecular Devices, Sunnyvale, CA). Extracellular recordings were made in voltage-clamp mode. For whole-cell voltage-clamp recordings, the intracellular solution contained 104 mM CsMeSO4, 8 mM CsCl, 5 mM Na2 Phosphocreatine, 4 mM HEPES, 2 mM Mg.ATP, 1 mM Na.GTP, 1 mM EGTA and 2 mM QX-314-Chloride, with this solution the calculated reversal potential for Cl− was −59 mV. Voltage-clamping at −60 mV and 0 mV isolated the EPSC and IPSC respectively. For whole-cell current-clamp measurements with high Cl− the intracellular solution contained 120 mM KCl, 10 mM Na2 Phosphocreatine, 4 mM HEPES, 2 mM Mg.ATP, 1 mM Na.GTP, 0.15 mM EGTA. For the passive dendrite recordings in Figure 4 the intracellular solution contained 104 mM KMeSO4, 8 mM KCl, 10 mM Na2 Phosphocreatine, 10 mM QX-314-Bromide, 4 mM HEPES, 2 mM MK801, 2 mM Mg.ATP, 1 mM Na.GTP, 0.15 mM EGTA. Pipettes had a resistance of 5-6 MΩ. Signals were digitized using an ITC18 A-D converter and acquired on a Mac mini using Neuromatic running in Igor Pro 6 (Wavemetrics, Lake Oswego, OR).
Motion anticipation allows the visual system to compensate for the slow speed of phototransduction so that a moving object can be accurately located. This correction is already present in the signal that ganglion cells send from the retina but the biophysical mechanisms underlying this computation are not known. Here we demonstrate that motion anticipation is computed autonomously within the dendritic tree of each ganglion cell and relies on feedforward inhibition. The passive and non-linear interaction of excitatory and inhibitory synapses enables the somatic voltage to encode the actual position of a moving object instead of its delayed representation. General rather than specific features of the retinal connectome govern this computation: an excess of inhibitory inputs over excitatory, with both being randomly distributed, allows tracking of all directions of motion, while the average distance between inputs determines the object velocities that can be compensated for.
The retina is a structure at the back of the eye that converts light into nerve impulses, which are then processed in the brain to produce the images that we see. It normally takes about one-tenth of a second for the retina to send a signal to the brain after an object first moves into view. This is about the same time it takes a tennis ball to travel several meters during a tennis match, yet we are still able to see where the moving tennis ball is in real time. This is because a process called ‘motion anticipation’ is able to compensate for the delay in processing the position of a moving object. However, it was not known precisely how motion anticipation occurs.