 Throughout the animal kingdom, dedicated signals allow individuals to identify and distinguish members of their own species: songbirds attract mates during bouts of singing, cichlid fish communicate dominance status with dramatic changes in body coloration, and rodents signal their social status through the emission of chemical cues (Brainard and Doupe, 2002; Tinbergen, 1951; Maruska and Fernald, 2011; Dulac and Kimchi, 2008). In turn, the execution of instinctive behaviors such as mating, parenting, territorial defense, and predator avoidance is triggered and modulated by sensory signals within a given physiological context, including the sex, endocrine, or developmental status of an individual (Tinbergen, 1951; Insel and Fernald, 2004). However, the brain circuits that organize species- and sex-specific instinctive behaviors in response to animal cues are still poorly characterized. To investigate how the MeA responds to chemosensory cues, we combined multisite extracellular recordings with sensory stimulation of the VNO in anesthetized mice (Figure 1A). Linear electrode arrays (Neuronexus) were positioned dorsal to the MeA based on stereotaxic coordinates (1.7-2.0 mm lateral and caudal from bregma; Franklin and Paxinos, 2007) and advanced until the electrode tip reached the ventral brain surface. This targeting strategy was intentionally chosen to focus on the posterior MeA (MeApd and MeApv), allowing simultaneous sampling of single and multi-unit activity from 32 evenly spaced sites distributed between MeA subnuclei with distinct functions. MeA units responsive to sensory stimuli were localized to the ventral surface of the brain and extended approximately 1 mm dorsally, consistent with the anatomy of the posterior MeA. The locations of all recording sites were confirmed through postmortem histology of dye-labeled electrode tracks (Figure 1B).10.7554/eLife.02743.003Figure 1.Experimental system for recording MeA sensory responses.(A) Vomeronasal and olfactory structures are shown in yellow and blue, respectively. Multichannel electrophysiological probes are stereotaxically positioned in the MeA to continuously record neural responses to sensory stimulation. VNO stimulus presentation (orange arrow) is achieved by placing nonvolatile stimuli in the nostril followed by electrical stimulation of the sympathetic nerve trunk (SNT) to activate the VNO pump and permit access of stimuli into the VNO. VNO stimuli are washed out through the NPD. MOE stimulation is achieved by controlling airflow of volatile stimuli into the nostril (blue arrow), which access the MOE, and are eliminated through a tracheotomy. (B) Diagram illustrating a coronal section through the posterior MeA with red dots indicating the expected dorsal-ventral distribution of recording sites. A single fluorescent electrode tract accurately targeted to MeA is shown in the inset. (C) Timecourse of VNO and MOE stimulation trials (top). Electrophysiological signals recorded from a single MeA electrode during four successive trials reveal a well-isolated unit responding only to female stimuli following electrical stimulation of SNT (stimulation artifacts are evident at 20 s). (D) Percentage of MeA units responding to VNO vs MOE stimulation with chance rates indicated by a horizontal dashed line. (E) Sagittal section of whole brain showing DAPI staining and the site of MeA FluoroGold iontophoresis. (F) Dense retrograde labeling of AOB projection neurons. (G) Fraction of AOB (99.8%) and MOB (0.2%) neurons that are retrogradely labeled by FluoroGold iontophoresis in the MeA.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.02743.00310.7554/eLife.02743.004Figure 1—figure supplement 1.Clustering and analysis of multichannel electrophysiological recordings.(A) Spike waveforms of four MeA units as recorded on two channels (channels on which signals from these units were not detected are not shown for simplicity). (B) Projections of spike waveforms on the first Principal components for each of the two channels shown in A. Even in this partial representation (projections on additional Principal Components are not shown) four clusters are clearly evident (same color scheme as in A). Initial clusters were generated by the KlustaKwik program and then adjusted manually. (C) Histograms showing the distribution of interspike intervals within each cluster. Units a and d were classified as ‘multi-units’ as they did not show a clear refractory period. Units b and c showed negligible refractory period violations (<4 ms) and were accordingly classified as ‘single units’. (D) The average spike waveform for all well-isolated MeA units. The lighter lines indicate STD. (E) Distribution of the spike maximum to spike minimum ratio for MeA units. (F) Distribution of spike widths (distance between the minimum and maximum) for all well-isolated MeA units. (G) Scatterplot showing the relationship between spike width and the min/max ratio. (H) Spike waveforms for four AOB units (as recorded on two channels). (I) Principal component projections for the four clusters depicted in H. (J) ISI histograms for the units shown in H and I. Unit b was classified as ‘multi-unit’ due to significant violations of the refractory period. The three other units (a, c, d) recorded by these channels were classified as single units. (K) Average spike waveform for all well-isolated AOB units, lighter lines indicate STD. (L) Distribution of spike maximum to spike minimum ratio for AOB units. (M) Distribution of spike widths for all well-isolated AOB units. (N) Scatterplot showing the relationship between spike width and the min/max ratio for AOB units.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.02743.00410.7554/eLife.02743.005Figure 1—figure supplement 2.Baseline electrophysiological characteristics of MeA responses.(A) Firing rates (spikes/second) for the 20 s prior to VNO stimulation are plotted against the firing rate during the 40 s after stimulus application. Each point indicates an isolated single unit with the most significant (p<0.01, Nonparametric ANOVA) stimulus induced response plotted for the post stimulus firing rate. Nearly all units lie above the line of unity (black diagonal) indicating that VNO stimulation positively drives MeA activity. (B) Single MeA units were grouped based on the pre stimulus firing rate, and the average response selectivity is plotted for units within each of these groups. A clear correlation was observed with less active neurons responding more specifically (black line; R = −0.31: p<0.0001).DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.02743.00510.7554/eLife.02743.006Figure 1—figure supplement 3.MOE-driven responses in the MOB and PLCO.To ensure that the MOE stimulation used in our anesthetized preparation was capable of driving responses in olfactory areas, we recorded from the MOB and PLCO. The top three rows are single units recorded from the MOB and the bottom row is a unit recorded from olfactory amygdala. Each column indicates the presentation of a different stimulus. For each panel, raster plots indicating the timing of individual action potentials elicited by multiple presentations of the same stimulus (shaded region). Histograms of the mean response and standard error for the same data are shown below each raster plot. Time zero indicates alignment to the start of stimulus presentation. All units responded significantly to at least one stimulus (p<0.01; Nonparametric ANOVA). Gray boxes indicate that a particular stimulus was not presented during that unit's recording session.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.02743.006 Our findings identify the MeA as a central node of the vomeronasal sensory-motor transformation, where critical parameters relevant to species- and sex-specific behavioral outputs are parsed out from the complex activity patterns evoked by natural stimuli. In the discussion below, we consider in further detail, the most significant features of chemosensory processing in the MeA that emerged from our study. Mice (adult, litters of juvenile mice, and pregnant females for estrogen treatments of newborn pups) were purchased from Charles River Laboratories (Wilmington, MA). ArKO male mice were kindly provided by Dr Evan Simpson (Fisher et al., 1998) and bred in house. All experiments were performed in strict compliance with the National Institute of Health and Harvard University.
Animal-animal recognition within, and across species, is essential for predator avoidance and social interactions. Despite its essential role in orchestrating responses to animal cues, basic principles of information processing by the vomeronasal system are still unknown. The medial amygdala (MeA) occupies a central position in the vomeronasal pathway, upstream of hypothalamic centers dedicated to defensive and social responses. We have characterized sensory responses in the mouse MeA and uncovered emergent properties that shed new light onto the transformation of vomeronasal information into sex- and species-specific responses. In particular, we show that the MeA displays a degree of stimulus selectivity and a striking sexually dimorphic sensory representation that are not observed in the upstream relay of the accessory olfactory bulb (AOB). Furthermore, our results demonstrate that the development of sexually dimorphic circuits in the MeA requires steroid signaling near the time of puberty to organize the functional representation of sensory stimuli.
Many animals emit and detect chemicals known as pheromones to communicate with other members of their own species. Animals also rely on chemical signals from other species to warn them, for example, that a predator is nearby. Many of these chemical signals—which are present in sweat, tears, urine, and saliva—are detected by a structure called the vomeronasal organ, which is located at the base of the nasal cavity.