 The establishment of functional neuronal networks relies on the correct incorporation of a neuron into a developing circuit. An extended neurite network enables a single neuron to process information from multiple input cells and to relay that information to a wide range of targets. Neurite formation during development is a dynamic process and therefore tight regulation seems necessary to achieve connection specificity. At earlier steps of circuit formation, axon guidance, an intensively investigated process, combines intrinsic factors and extracellular cues to form a trajectory towards the general target area (Williams et al., 2003; Schnorrer and Dickson, 2004; Kolodkin and Tessier-Lavigne, 2011; Pappu et al., 2011). Subsequently, the formation of precise axonal connections within the target area relies on the development of the correct number of axonal branches. Currently, the mechanisms regulating axonal branch number and accuracy are largely unknown and subject to much debate. The dorsal cluster neurons (DCNs) establish a complex neurite network in the Drosophila adult optic lobes. A small subset of neurons from this cluster extend their axons in the outer part of the optic lobe, the medulla (Me) (Srahna et al., 2006; Langen et al., 2013), where they form a stereotypic pattern of axonal branches (Figure 1A,B). This pattern can be readily visualized using the ato-Gal4 driver in combination with a UAS-driven marker of choice such as CD8-GFP. Flip-out single cell clones (Wong et al., 2002) reveal the branch pattern of an individual axon derived from a single neuron of the 12 medulla innervating DCNs (Figure 1C). False color labeling and tracing (Longair et al., 2011) of single DCN Me axons and their branches (Figure 1D) reveals that each axon generates 6-8 primary branches, with a mean of 7 branches. This stereotypic pattern is achieved by hot spots of branches extending in dorsal and ventral direction from each main axon shaft. The first main branch point is located at the border between lobula and Me with one or two branches. The next major branch point with often two branches is situated in Me layers M7-M8 and in this location branches from distinct neighboring axons are often in close contact forming a grid-like pattern. The terminal set of up to four branches is distributed over the M1-M3 layers and is more often intermingled with neighboring axon branches. In between the two most distal branch points intermediate branches occur occasionally. DCN branches never extend beyond the Me neuropil.10.7554/eLife.01699.003Figure 1.The axonal network of medulla dorsal cluster neurons (DCNs) in the adult central nervous system of Drosophila.(A) Dorsal cluster neurons, labeled with lacZ (red) using the atoGal4-14a driver, with its dendritic and axonal projections in the optic lobes of the CNS. Using the FLP-out system, an individual neuron is labeled with mCD8-GFP (green) within the background of the entire cluster. AtoGal4-14a is used in all the following experiments except when stated otherwise. (B) DCN axons, labeled with mCD8-GFP, form a stereotypic pattern of axonal branches within the medulla (Me) of the adult optic lobe. (C) Using the FLP-out system the axon and branches of an individual neuron are labeled with mCD8-GFP (green) within the background of the entire cluster labeled with lacZ (red). (D) False color labeling of one Me DCN axon with its main shaft (green) and branches (magenta) using a tracer tool. The scale bars represent 100 µm in (A) and 20 µm in (B-D).DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.01699.003 The refinement of exuberant branches is a crucial step during the development of a neuronal network. In this work, we exploit an adult-specific model circuit, the dorsal cluster neurons, to study developmental neurite pruning processes in the CNS of Drosophila. DCN axons form a stereotyped number of branches innervating the medulla through initial excessive axon branch formation followed by a refinement process. Our data suggest a model (Figure 9) whereby uneven distribution of EGFR to developing DCN axonal branches is required to eliminate exuberant branches and help generate the correct adult connectivity pattern.10.7554/eLife.01699.033Figure 9.A model for EGFR function in axonal branching.Local asymmetries in tyrosine kinase receptor activity in axonal branch, driven by differential distribution of active receptor molecules in filopodia, generate dynamical behavior and drive branch pruning. Gray dots represent EGFR puncta trafficked along the axon shaft (red) while yellow dots represent active EGFR puncta within branches (green).DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.01699.033 Fly stocks were cultured on standard fly food. All experiments were performed in temperature-controlled incubators at 25°C or 28°C. The GAL4 driver lines used in this study are: ato-Gal4-14a (Hassan et al., 2000), sca-Gal4, elav-Gal4. The UAS-reporter stocks were the following: UAS-CD8-GFP, UAS-CD8-cherryRFP, UAS-LacZ, UAS-EGFRDN-A (gift from M Freeman), UAS-EGFRDN-B, UAS-EGFRRNAi (VDRC107130), UAS-SpiRNAi (TRiP, JF03322), UAS-EGFRCA, UAS-Utrophin-GFP (gift from T Lecuit), UAS-Moesin-GFP (Dutta et al., 2002), lexAop-myr-GFP, atolexA. Additional fly stocks and mutants used were: Canton-S, EGFRT1. For FLP-out system experiments yw, hs-FLP; UAS-FRT CD2, y FRT mCD8::GFP; atoGal4-14a, UAS-LacZ was crossed out to Canton-S or UAS-EGFRDN-A. atoLexA was created by knocking LexA into the ato locus to drive LexAop-myr-GFP expression.
Axonal branching allows a neuron to connect to several targets, increasing neuronal circuit complexity. While axonal branching is well described, the mechanisms that control it remain largely unknown. We find that in the Drosophila CNS branches develop through a process of excessive growth followed by pruning. In vivo high-resolution live imaging of developing brains as well as loss and gain of function experiments show that activation of Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor (EGFR) is necessary for branch dynamics and the final branching pattern. Live imaging also reveals that intrinsic asymmetry in EGFR localization regulates the balance between dynamic and static filopodia. Elimination of signaling asymmetry by either loss or gain of EGFR function results in reduced dynamics leading to excessive branch formation. In summary, we propose that the dynamic process of axon branch development is mediated by differential local distribution of signaling receptors.
In the human brain, 100 billion neurons form 100 trillion connections. Each neuron consists of a cell body with numerous small branch-like projections known as dendrites (from the Greek word for ‘tree’), plus a long cable-like structure called the axon. Neurons receive electrical inputs from neighboring cells via their dendrites, and then relay these signals onto other cells in their network via their axons.