 The complex manner in which patterns of action potentials (AP) are transformed into neurotransmitter release suggests the existence of multiple presynaptic calcium (Ca2+) sensors (Kaeser and Regehr, 2013). Synaptotagmin-1, synaptotagmin-2, and synaptotagmin-9 have been identified as Ca2+ sensors for synchronous release (Sudhof, 2013), but the Ca2+ sensors that regulate short-term use-dependent plasticity remain elusive. For a widespread form of short-term plasticity termed post-tetanic potentiation (PTP), a high-frequency burst of presynaptic APs enhances subsequent AP-evoked release for tens of seconds. PTP requires sustained elevation of presynaptic Ca2+, and in most cases synaptic enhancement outlives Ca2+ increases (Regehr et al., 1994; Brager et al., 2003; Korogod et al., 2005; Habets and Borst, 2007; Fioravante et al., 2011, 2012). Although PTP is thought to contribute to short-term memory (Silva et al., 1996; Abbott and Regehr, 2004), the Ca2+ sensor that mediates this plasticity has not been identified. To investigate the function of PKCCa isoforms in PTP, we first examined their role at the functionally mature calyx of Held synapse (postnatal day 17-22) (Fedchyshyn and Wang, 2005; Yang et al., 2010) using double knockout mice for PKCα and β (αβ dko). We recorded excitatory postsynaptic currents (EPSCs) from principal neurons in the medial nucleus of the trapezoid body (MNTB) in response to extracellular stimulation. Tetanic stimulation induced PTP in wild-type animals (Figure 1B, black) but not in PKCαβ dko animals (Figure 1B, purple). Thus, in contrast to the immature calyx of Held where a substantial component of PTP (∼20%) is independent of PKCCa (Fioravante et al., 2011), PTP at the functionally mature calyx of Held relies entirely on PKCCa isoforms. To the best of our knowledge, PKCβ is the first Ca2+ sensor to be identified specifically for short-term synaptic plasticity. Similar to synaptotagmin-1, synaptotagmin-2, and synaptotagmin-9, PKCβ requires binding of Ca2+ to its C2 domain for its Ca2+-sensing function (Figure 3). However, PKCβ acts upstream of vesicle fusion (de Jong and Verhage, 2009), does not regulate basal transmission or paired-pulse plasticity (Figure 1—figure supplement 4), and is not expected to be activated by single stimuli. How do PKCβ and synaptotagmins respond to such different activity patterns and, consequently, such different Ca2+ signals? It is likely a combination of differences in Ca2+-binding properties and subcellular localization that underlie these contrasting responses (Nalefski et al., 2001). Synaptotagmin-1 binds Ca2+ cooperatively with low affinity and fast kinetics, and localizes close to release sites on synaptic vesicles; therefore, it is poised to detect large, transient Ca2+ signals near open voltage-gated Ca2+ channels (Sudhof, 2013). In contrast, PKCβ is activated by lower Ca2+ levels with lower cooperativity and is cytosolic (Nalefski and Newton, 2001; Kohout et al., 2002). Prolonged stimulation is necessary to produce a sufficient buildup of Ca2+ to activate PKCβ, which is consistent with the prolonged activity requirement for PTP (Habets and Borst, 2005; Korogod et al., 2005). Cloning was performed by Genscript. Viruses were generated by the University of Pennsylvania Vector Core. All constructs were verified by sequencing. Wild-type PKCβ-YFP (βWT-YFP) was obtained through PCR from Addgene plasmid #14866 (Violin et al., 2003), using the following primers: 5′-GACACAACAGTCTCGAACTTAATCGAACCCGCGGCACGAGCCTCGACG-3′; 3′-GGGAAAAAGATCGGATCCTCAGGCGTCGACGGGCCCTCTAGATTACTTG-5′. To generate an adeno-associated viral vector, PKCβWT-YFP was inserted into a pENN.AAV.CMV.TurboRFP.RBG cis-plasmid (courtesy of the University of Pennsylvania Vector Core) using SacII and SalI, after removal of the TurboRFP sequence with SpeI and XhoI. Mutant PKCβ-YFP (βD/A-YFP) was generated by replacing the 5 aspartates that coordinate calcium binding (Sutton and Sprang, 1998) with alanines through PCR.
In presynaptic boutons, calcium (Ca2+) triggers both neurotransmitter release and short-term synaptic plasticity. Whereas synaptotagmins are known to mediate vesicle fusion through binding of high local Ca2+ to their C2 domains, the proteins that sense smaller global Ca2+ increases to produce short-term plasticity have remained elusive. Here, we identify a Ca2+ sensor for post-tetanic potentiation (PTP), a form of plasticity thought to underlie short-term memory. We find that at the functionally mature calyx of Held synapse the Ca2+-dependent protein kinase C isoforms α and β are necessary for PTP, and the expression of PKCβ in PKCαβ double knockout mice rescues PTP. Disruption of Ca2+ binding to the PKCβ C2 domain specifically prevents PTP without impairing other PKCβ-dependent forms of synaptic enhancement. We conclude that different C2-domain-containing presynaptic proteins are engaged by different Ca2+ signals, and that Ca2+ increases evoked by tetanic stimulation are sensed by PKCβ to produce PTP.
Brain function is dependent upon the rapid transfer of information from one brain cell to the next at junctions known as synapses. When an electrical signal called an action potential is generated by the cell before the synapse, the presynaptic cell, it triggers an influx of calcium ions into that cell. These ions activate specific calcium sensors, triggering release of molecules called neurotransmitters from the presynaptic cell through exocytosis of synaptic vesicles. These neurotransmitters bind to receptors on the membrane of the postsynaptic cell, and produce an electrical signal whose size is a measure of synaptic strength.