 A diverse array of touch receptors allows animals to discern object shapes, to explore surface textures and to detect forces impinging upon the skin. In mammals, distinct classes of mechanosensory afferents are tuned to extract specific features of a tactile stimulus and then to encode them as trains of action potentials, or spikes, with unique firing properties (Johnson, 2001). A common feature of mechanosensory neurons is specialized anatomical structures, termed end organs, that shape their neuronal outputs (Chalfie, 2009). For example, recent studies show that mouse hair follicles are innervated by at least three molecularly (Li et al., 2011) and 10 anatomically (Wu et al., 2012) distinct types of cutaneous afferents. A key unanswered question is: how does a tactile afferent’s peripheral architecture govern its neuronal response to touch stimuli? SAI afferents are myelinated Aβ afferents that innervate Merkel cells located in the epidermis. Although dermal segments are thickly myelinated, SAI afferents lose their myelin sheaths just below the dermal-epidermal junction. Unmyelinated branches, which are here termed ‘neurites’, then traverse the basal lamina to contact Merkel cells (Figure 1A; Iggo and Muir, 1969). To identify structural domains in mouse SAI afferents, we first sought to localize nodes of Ranvier, which are sites of spike integration and propagation, as well as heminodes, which are the anatomical substrates of spike initiation.10.7554/eLife.01488.003Figure 1.Morphometry of touch-dome afferents reveals diverse end-organ architectures.(A) Schematic of the SAI afferent’s end organ. (B and C) SAI afferents, labeled with antibodies against Neurofilament-H (NFH; cyan) and Myelin Basic Protein (MBP; magenta), were identified by their connection to Keratin 8-positive Merkel cells (K8; blue) in touch-dome cryosections. The voltage-gated sodium channel NaV1.6 (yellow) localized to heminodes (B) and nodes of Ranvier (C). Scale bar in C (10 µm) applies to B. (D-F) Projections of touch domes labeled in whole mount. (D) NFH (red), MBP (green) and K8 (blue) labeled Merkel cells contacted by a single myelinated afferent (see also Video 1) or (E) two afferent branches whose point of convergence was not identified (see also Video 2). Arrows: examples of heminodes; arrowheads: examples of nodes of Ranvier. (F) NaV1.6 (green) identified heminodes and nodes in an NFH-positive afferent (red) innervating K8-positive Merkel cells (blue). Inset shows an expanded view of an NaV1.6-positive node. Scale bar in F (50 µm) applies to D-F’. (D’-F’) Projections of 3D reconstructions of end organs shown above: afferent (black), Merkel cells (green), heminodes (red half-circles) and nodes (red circles). (E’) A non-converging branch is marked in gray. Note that this branch is thinner than other myelinated branches. (G) The highest branching order found in each SAI afferent arbor was independent of the number of Merkel cells contacted. (H) Morphometric quantification of reconstructed touch domes innervated by single afferents. (I) More than 80% of Merkel cells were contacted by neurites and a similar proportion of terminal neurites contacted Merkel cells (N = 15 touch domes from five mice in G-I). Red lines represent median values in H and I.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.01488.003 In nervous systems ranging from C. elegans to mammals, touch receptors display a rich array of specialized end organs that correlate with distinct physiological functions; however, little is known about how specific architectural features govern neuronal firing patterns (Chalfie, 2009). In this study, we combined neuroanatomy, electrophysiology and computational modeling to identify structural features of a mammalian touch receptor that have the potential to impact neuronal firing. Our morphometric analysis extends previous studies that visualized arbors of neonatal SAI afferents by tracer iontophoresis (Woodbury and Koerber, 2007) and surveyed cutaneous afferents in mouse hairy skin by sparse genetic labeling (Li et al., 2011; Wu et al., 2012). To our knowledge, this study is the first to construct computational models of mammalian tactile afferents that are constrained with structural parameters quantified from intact tactile end organs. Computational results predict that asymmetric clustering of transduction sites at spike initiation zones regulates mechanosensory coding in a branched tactile afferent. These results generate testable hypotheses and highlight the integral role of peripheral neuronal structure in somatosensory signaling. Animal use was conducted according to guidelines from the National Institutes of Health’s Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals and was approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committees of Baylor College of Medicine and Columbia University Medical Center.
Touch is encoded by cutaneous sensory neurons with diverse morphologies and physiological outputs. How neuronal architecture influences response properties is unknown. To elucidate the origin of firing patterns in branched mechanoreceptors, we combined neuroanatomy, electrophysiology and computation to analyze mouse slowly adapting type I (SAI) afferents. These vertebrate touch receptors, which innervate Merkel cells, encode shape and texture. SAI afferents displayed a high degree of variability in touch-evoked firing and peripheral anatomy. The functional consequence of differences in anatomical architecture was tested by constructing network models representing sequential steps of mechanosensory encoding: skin displacement at touch receptors, mechanotransduction and action-potential initiation. A systematic survey of arbor configurations predicted that the arrangement of mechanotransduction sites at heminodes is a key structural feature that accounts in part for an afferent’s firing properties. These findings identify an anatomical correlate and plausible mechanism to explain the driver effect first described by Adrian and Zotterman.
Sensory receptors in the skin supply us with information about objects in the world around us, including their shape and texture. These receptors also detect pressure, temperature, and pain, enabling us to respond appropriately to stimuli that could be potentially harmful.