 The cellular composition and connectivity of vertebrate sensory systems are shaped by signals from the external environment. These activity-dependent changes occur during critical windows of neuronal development as well as in the adult brain, enabling the animal to best perform in a given environment. Pioneering experiments in the visual system showed that patterns of light stimuli reaching each of the two eyes are essential for the activity-dependent refinement of ocular dominance columns in the visual cortex during perinatal development (Hubel and Wiesel, 1977). Similarly, experience-dependent plasticity has been shown to participate in the functional maturation of other sensory systems, including the auditory, somatosensory, and olfactory systems (Hensch, 2004). In addition to their important role in shaping sensory circuits during development, environmental stimuli can also significantly affect adult brain structures, leading to adaptive as well as maladaptive changes in sensory responses (Buonomano and Merzenich, 1998; Ramachandran and Hirstein, 1998; Moseley and Flor, 2012). A molecular and bioinformatics search for genes expressed differentially in neuronal subpopulations of the mouse MOE and VNO led to the identification of an uncharacterized H2B histone variant (symbol: Hist2h2be; named for its position (e) among H2B-encoding genes within mouse histone cluster 2 (Marzluff et al., 2002) and referred to herein as H2be). Microarray and in situ hybridization (ISH) analyses revealed high expression of H2be in the MOE and apical VNO neuroepithelium (Figure 1A,B), but no expression in the olfactory bulb (OB) or brain. The Genepaint and Genomics Institute of the Novartis Research Foundation (GNF) GeneAtlas (Su et al., 2004) databases, which contain transcriptional information for embryo sections (Figure 1C) and 61 mouse tissues (Figure 1D), respectively, confirmed the remarkable specificity of H2be expression in the MOE and VNO.10.7554/eLife.00070.003Figure 1.Mouse H2BE is detected exclusively in chemosensory neurons. (A) Analysis of H2be mRNA in the MOE of an 8-week old mouse, showing expression limited to sensory neurons. Boxed region is magnified (right). (B) Analysis of H2be mRNA in the VNO of an 8-week old mouse, showing expression limited to sensory neurons, especially in the apical zone. (C) Analysis of H2be mRNA in a sagittal section of an E14.5 mouse embryo (image from genepaint.org; ID: ES2590). (D) Profile of H2be mRNA levels in 61 mouse tissues (listed, right), showing exclusive expression in MOE and VNO. Data from GNF, now maintained by BioGPS (http://biogps.org/). (E) Alignment of H2BE and canonical H2B sequences. H2BE variant positions are highlighted in red; H2B PTM sites supported by >5 or ≤5 reports are highlighted in dark and light gray, respectively (http://www.phosphosite.org). Scale bars for (A), 500 µm; (B), 100 µm; (C), 1000 µm.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.00070.003 We have shown here that the activity-dependent replacement of canonical H2B with H2BE, an olfactory-specific histone variant, has a direct impact on the gene expression and life span of olfactory sensory neurons. These findings uncover a novel mechanism by which the sensory experience of a neuron is recorded within its chromatin to affect its transcriptional program and longevity. All procedures involving animals were carried out in accordance with NIH standards and approved by the Harvard University Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC). Unless otherwise indicated, values are presented as the mean plus-minus standard error of the mean.
We have identified a replication-independent histone variant, Hist2h2be (referred to herein as H2be), which is expressed exclusively by olfactory chemosensory neurons. Levels of H2BE are heterogeneous among olfactory neurons, but stereotyped according to the identity of the co-expressed olfactory receptor (OR). Gain- and loss-of-function experiments demonstrate that changes in H2be expression affect olfactory function and OR representation in the adult olfactory epithelium. We show that H2BE expression is reduced by sensory activity and that it promotes neuronal cell death, such that inactive olfactory neurons display higher levels of the variant and shorter life spans. Post-translational modifications (PTMs) of H2BE differ from those of the canonical H2B, consistent with a role for H2BE in altering transcription. We propose a physiological function for H2be in modulating olfactory neuron population dynamics to adapt the OR repertoire to the environment.
A hallmark of the nervous systems of all mammals is their capacity to undergo changes in function that are shaped by experience. This phenomenon underlies the ability of our brains to develop properly and to learn, and also enables various sensory systems—including the visual, auditory and olfactory systems—to perform optimally in diverse environments.