 Nucleus reuniens (NRe), one of the largest midline thalamic nuclei, receives extensive limbic inputs and provides a bridge linking the hippocampus (especially area CA1) with medial prefrontal cortex (McKenna and Vertes, 2004; Vertes, 2006; Prasad and Chudasama, 2013). Its functions are not well-understood, but it has been suggested that, via these connections, NRe influences memory consolidation for spatial learning and generalisation of fear conditioning (Eleore et al., 2011; Loureiro et al., 2012; Xu and Sudhof, 2013). To elucidate its functions open-field single-unit recordings in NRe of freely-moving rats were made (Mink et al., 1983). We have found an unexpected population of NRe cells signalling head direction (HD) in the horizontal plane, independent of location within the test arena. These cells resemble HD cells in the anterodorsal and anteroventral thalamic nuclei (Shinder and Taube, 2011; Tsanov et al., 2011), the lateral mammillary nucleus (Taube, 2007), and certain parahippocampal regions (Cassel et al., 2013). NRe cells maintain head directionality during light–dark transitions, and in environments of different shape. These cells establish directionality rapidly upon first entering an environment. NRe has not, to date, been part of the traditional HD circuit, which largely originates in the dorsal tegmental nucleus of Gudden and the lateral mammillary nucleus (Taube, 2007; Cassel et al., 2013). Subsequent processing is via the anterodorsal thalamic nucleus, dorsal presubiculum, entorhinal cortex and to the hippocampus (Su and Bentivoglio, 1990; Vertes et al., 2007). Our findings, therefore, reveal a novel head direction signal potentially modulating the hippocampal CA fields and, therefore, hippocampal spatial processing (Brandon et al., 2013). Lighting conditions were systematically varied across foraging sessions for 10 cells. The animal foraged during light-dark-light sessions (each 20 min). Light removal did not affect NRe head directional activity (Figure 1).10.7554/eLife.03075.003Figure 1.Head direction cells recorded in the nucleus reuniens.(A) 18 representative head direction (HD) cells in nucleus reuniens (NRe); (B) NRe location on a coronal (left) and corresponding sagittal (right) rat brain section (adapted from Paxinos and Watson, 2005); (C) representative histological specimen showing electrode track (left); recording positions corresponding to cell locations presented in panel a (upper right inset) showing location of NRe and detailed atlas (lower right inset); (D) representative recordings showing multi-day stability of HD cells: a representative cell recorded on each day of 16 days (multiple transitions from light-dark-light, and environmental transformations from circle to square to circle). The solid line is the mean spike waveform and dashed lines are M plus-minus SD of the spike waveform. The green outline shows predicted firing rates given the proportion of time the animal spent looking in each direction, calculated according to the distributive hypothesis.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.03075.003 Nucleus Reuniens has been investigated anatomically, but remains largely unexplored electrophysiologically (Cassel et al., 2013). The HD cells in NRe share many characteristics of other HD cells, such as those in the anterodorsal and anteroventral thalamic nuclei, the dorsal presubiculum and retrosplenial cortex (Taube, 2007). Current theoretical models of HD information suggest that the HD signal derives, in part, from the dorsal tegmental nucleus of Gudden and the lateral mammillary nuclei (Taube, 2007; Cassel et al., 2013). In addition to projecting to the anterodorsal thalamic nucleus, the lateral mammillary nucleus innervates NRe (McKenna and Vertes, 2004). NRe also receives inputs from presubiculum (postsubiculum) and retrosplenial cortex, other sites containing HD cells. This pattern of connectivity suggests various potential sources for the heading information found in NRe. The presence of spatial cells in NRe is highly significant, as it is the major source of direct thalamic projections to the CA fields of the rat hippocampus (Su and Bentivoglio, 1990). NRe also receives widespread cortical and limbic inputs, involving both interoceptive and exteroceptive information. This nucleus has a notable role linking medial prefrontal cortex with the hippocampus (Prasad and Chudasama, 2013). These NRe HD cells are, therefore, pivotally positioned to influence hippocampal spatial processing directly because of its dense, direct connections with both the prefrontal cortex and hippocampus (Vertes, 2006; Prasad and Chudasama, 2013). Finally, the theta-skipping cells may provide a pace-maker like function for synchronising some early components of the HD system. The data from which this paper was generated are archived at doi: 10.5061/dryad.j68v0 and may be accessed via http://dx.doi.org/10.5061/dryad.j68v0.
Discrete populations of brain cells signal heading direction, rather like a compass. These ‘head direction’ cells are largely confined to a closely-connected network of sites. We describe, for the first time, a population of head direction cells in nucleus reuniens of the thalamus in the freely-moving rat. This novel subcortical head direction signal potentially modulates the hippocampal CA fields directly and, thus, informs spatial processing and memory.
Whether it is foraging for food or finding its way back to its nest, an animal often needs to know which direction it is heading in. Some neurons in a mammal’s brain have been shown to act like a compass, and send out nerve impulses whenever the animal points its head in a certain direction. For example, some of these neurons will fire when the animal faces northeast, but not when it faces northwest, and vice versa.