 Brain state-dependent network oscillations occurring at various frequencies provide multiscale temporal windows for the precise timing of neuronal discharges and the temporal binding of spatially distributed cell populations (Singer, 1993; Buzsaki and Chrobak, 1995). The spatio-temporal control of principal cell assemblies during endogenous brain rhythms is orchestrated by GABAergic interneurons (Soltesz, 2006; Somogyi et al., 2014). Versatility and precision in the GABAergic coordination of principal cell excitability arise from the diversity of interneurons that enables the selective timing of GABAergic inputs to specific spatial domains of principal cells. Within the CA1 region of the rodent hippocampus, 21 distinct interneuronal classes are currently recognized, each possessing unique input-output connectivity patterns, developmental profiles, and characteristic molecular and electrophysiological properties (Klausberger and Somogyi, 2008; Bezaire and Soltesz, 2013). The distinct features of interneuronal classes enable these cells to be selectively recruited to entrain principal cell populations into different oscillatory patterns of activity, including the theta, gamma, epsilon, and ripple waves that are associated with specific behaviors (O'Keefe and Nadel, 1978; O'Keefe and Recce, 1993; Soltesz and Deschenes, 1993; Buzsaki and Chrobak, 1995; Lubenov and Siapas, 2009; Colgin and Moser, 2010; Maier et al., 2011). Fast spiking PV interneurons (total: n = 27; Figure 1A) were post-hoc identified primarily based on their axonal characteristics as BCs (n = 12; 7 were included in Varga et al., 2012), Bistrat cells (n = 8), or AACs (n = 7). A summary of the n = 27 PV cells, including the immunocytochemical tests and EM verification used for each cell, is presented in Table 1. Axons of the BCs were largely confined to the stratum pyramidale, where they formed synapses on the somata and proximal dendrites of PCs. Electron microscopic verification of somatic axonal targets of BCs was performed in n = 4 cells. In contrast, the dendritically projecting Bistrat cells had the majority of their axons in the stratum radiatum and some in the stratum oriens. Since the axons of Bistrat cells avoided the stratum pyramidale, the axons provided a feature of Bistrat cells that clearly distinguished them from the other two cell classes. The AACs projected to the stratum pyramidale, where they formed synapses exclusively on the axon initial segments. The targets of n = 5 AACs were identified at the EM level (number of boutons examined: 11, 10, 10, 8, 4, all synapsing on axon initial segments). Out of the two AACs not tested at the EM level, one AAC was tested for ankyrinG, a marker for axon initial segments (Jenkins and Bennett, 2001). The axon terminals of the tested AACs were found to be in close juxtaposition with ankyrinG immunopositive profiles (not shown). The remaining AAC was tested for the expression of special AT-rich sequence binding protein 1 (SATB1), because SATB1 is expressed in BCs and Bistrat cells but not in AACs (Viney et al., 2013). As expected, the AAC was found to be immunonegative for SATB1 (not shown).10.7554/eLife.04006.003Figure 1.PV cells discharge at similar rates during running-associated theta oscillations but show between-class differences in theta modulation and preferred phases of firing.(A) The 3 classes of PV interneuron innervate distinct post-synaptic domains of CA1 PCs (black). AACs exclusively target the axon initial segments (AAC, blue); BCs innervate the perisomatic region (somata and proximal dendrites) (BC, red); Bistrat cells synapse on the apical and basal dendrites (Bistrat, green). (B) Firing frequencies during running are high and not significantly different between the 3 PV cell classes. (C) Mean preferred phase vs modulation strength of PV cell discharges. Blue triangles: AACs, red circles: BCs, green squares: Bistrat cells. A thin gray line representing a theta cycle is shown to illustrate the theta phases. (D-F) Example traces of LFP, spikes, and filtered theta oscillation of an AAC (D), BC (E), and Bistrat cell (F). Scales: LFPs = 0.5 mV; single cell unit firing = 1 mV; theta = 0.4 mV.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.04006.00310.7554/eLife.04006.004Table 1.List of all n = 27 in vivo juxtacellularly filled PV interneurons and their identification based on immunocytochemistry and electron microscopy (EM)DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.04006.004Cell ID#Cell typeParvalbuminSomatostatinmGluR1aSATB1Bouton targetsAnkyrinG verificationEM verification123011c3C-BC+n.t.n.t.n.t.n.t.Soma/proximal dendritecvi30C-BC+n.t.n.t.n.t.n.t.Soma/proximal dendritecvi33C-BC+n.t.n.t.n.t.n.t.n.t.cvi35C-BC+n.t.n.t.n.t.n.t.n.t.cvi55C-BCn.t.n.t.n.t.n.t.n.t.Soma/proximal dendritecvi65C-BC+n.t.n.t.n.t.n.t.n.t.cvi75C-BC+n.t.n.t.n.t.n.t.n.t.cvi151C-BCn.t.n.t.n.t.n.t.n.t.n.t.cvi251C-BCn.t.n.t.n.t.n.t.n.t.n.t.cvi240bH-BC+n.t.n.t.n.t.n.t.Soma/proximal dendrite042911c5H-BC+n.t.n.t.n.t.n.t.n.t.gs0920H-BC+n.t.n.t.n.t.n.t.n.t.gs012913O-Bistrat++n.t.n.t.n.t.n.t.gs022713O-Bistrat++n.t.n.t.n.t.n.t.cvi017O-Bistratn.t.+n.t.n.t.n.t.n.t.cvi255O-Bistrat−+n.t.n.t.n.t.n.t.cvi312O-Bistratn.t.+−n.t.n.t.n.t.cvi270C-Bistrat++n.t.n.t.n.t.n.t.imi069C-Bistratn.t.+n.t.n.t.n.t.n.t.cvi190C-Bistrat−+n.t.n.t.n.t.n.t.090311c3E-AAC+n.t.n.t.n.t.n.t.AIScvi059E-AACn.t.n.t.n.t.n.t.n.t.AIScvi153C-AACn.t.n.t.n.t.n.t.n.t.AIScvi258C-AAC+n.t.n.t.n.t.n.t.AIScvi315C-AACn.t.n.t.n.t.−n.t.n.t.imi075C-AAC+n.t.n.t.n.t.AISn.t07082014cs6C-AACn.t.n.t.n.t.n.t.AISAISAbbreviations: n.t.: not tested; AIS: axon initial segment. In this study, we examined the firing patterns of anatomically identified, fast-spiking, PV interneurons in the CA1 region of the mouse hippocampus under awake head-fixed conditions in order to provide insights into how the spatio-temporal patterns of GABA release from PV interneurons may regulate the excitability of populations of PCs during brain state-dependent hippocampal rhythms. Given that the canonical property of PV cells is their uniquely rapid signaling capability (Norenberg et al., 2010; Armstrong and Soltesz, 2012; Chiovini et al., 2014), our focus was on the fast (>90 Hz) oscillations. Since the epsilon rhythm occurs embedded within the theta oscillations, we first analyzed the discharge patterns of PV interneurons during theta waves. The data showed that the AACs fired with the strongest theta modulation. Unlike AACs from anesthetized rats (Klausberger et al., 2003), AACs in our awake head-fixed mice clearly did not fire with the highest probability close to the peak of theta rhythm (180°), but in fact discharged at 251° (the 71° difference corresponds to a 25 ms delay for an average, 8 Hz theta with a cycle duration of 125 ms). Although inter-species differences cannot be ruled out, the one AAC previously reported from the CA1 of non-anesthetized freely moving rats in the literature also discharged well after the theta peak (at 225°) (Viney et al., 2013). Furthermore, it is interesting to note that all of the 20 optogenetically tagged PV cells in a recent study conducted in freely moving mice discharged during the descending phase of the theta rhythm and none fired preferentially at the peak (Royer et al., 2012). Therefore, it appears that in animals during running, the axon initial segments of PCs receive a barrage of GABA inputs from AACs during the descending phase of the theta cycle (at 251° on average), followed by inputs from BCs onto their cell bodies and proximal dendrites about 20 ms later (at 310°), and then, with another approximately 20 ms delay on average, near the theta trough (360° or 0°), Bistrat cells release GABA onto the basal and mid-level apical dendrites. Thus, the pattern of discharges by the three cardinal PV interneuron classes is organized to generate a spatio-temporally exquisitely orchestrated axon initial segment to somata/proximal dendrites to mid-level dendrites sweep of fast GABAergic inhibition in a relatively short time window (Figure 7A, ‘Theta’).10.7554/eLife.04006.010Figure 7.Summary of the temporal ordering of discharges by the three main PV cell classes (A) and the firing properties of the new sub-classes of PV cell during ripples (B).(A) Schematic illustration shows a PC with axon terminals from AACs (blue), BCs (red), and Bistrat cells (green); the same color code is used to illustrate the phase-preferential firing of the three major PV cell classes during theta, gamma, epsilon, and ripple oscillations. Note that the axon initial segment receives the earliest inputs during theta waves, whereas during the faster rhythms (gamma, epsilon, ripple) BCs fire first, followed by the Bistrat cells and the AACs. (B) Layer-specific locations of somata and dendrites segregate with the ripple-related discharge properties of the 6 PV sub-classes. Note the enhanced firing by the H-BCs, E-AACs, and the O-Bistrat cells compared to their classical counterparts (C-BCs, C-AACs, and C-Bistrats).DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.04006.010 All experiments were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committees of the University of California at Irvine, the University of California at Los Angeles and the University of Pecs. Anesthesia, surgical procedures, experimental design, and data acquisition were the same as described earlier (Varga et al., 2012). Briefly, head bars were implanted during deep isoflurane anesthesia on C57BL/6 male and female adult (3-12 months) mice. The animals were acclimated to run on an 8-inch spherical treadmill. On the day of data collection, craniotomy was performed over the dorsal hippocampus (−2 mm AP and 2 mm lateral) under deep anesthesia (isoflurane). Recordings were started after the animal became fully alert (min 30 min after termination of anesthesia), and the two glass recording electrodes (borosilicate, long taper) were placed into the stratum pyramidale (LFP channel, for field potential recording; its position in the stratum pyramidale was carefully adjusted based on the maximal ripple amplitude) and into the stratum oriens/pyramidale for single unit recordings/juxtacellular labeling (referred to as the unit channel below). After neurobiotin labeling of the recorded interneurons (1.5-2% in 0.5 M NaCl in the juxtacellular electrode [Pinault, 1996]), the experiments were terminated and the animals were perfused within 4 hr under deep anesthesia. Fixatives contained 4% paraformaldehyde, 0.1-0.05% glutaraldehyde, 15% saturated picric acid, and 0.1 M phosphate buffer (PB, pH = 7.4). The brains were cut into 60-μm thick sections with a vibratome. Neurobiotin was first visualized with Alexa Fluor 488 conjugated streptavidin (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) and samples including soma/dendrite/axons were selected for further immunohistochemical analysis. Specific protein expressions were checked with the help of the following antibodies: rabbit anti-PV (Swant, Switzerland), mouse anti-PV (Sigma-Aldrich, Carlsbad, CA), rat anti-somatostatin (Millipore, Temecula, CA), goat anti-SATB1 (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Dallas, TX), goat anti-mGluR1a (Frontier Science Co., Ltd, Japan). Antibodies were diluted in 0.1 M PB containing 0.3% Triton-X100 and sections were incubated overnight at room temperature in the antibody cocktails. Secondary antibodies (raised in donkey against rabbit/goat/mouse/rat and conjugated to Dylight 594/649/405, Jackson Immunoresearch, USA) were used to detect the location of the primary antibodies. Documentation of the immunoreactivity was performed with either a CCD camera attached to a Zeiss Axioscope microscope or confocal microscopy with an Olympus FV1000 or Zeiss LSM780 microscope. Finally the neurobiotin filled cells were visualized with 3,3′-diaminobenzidine tetrahydrochloride (DAB), dehydrated and embedded for electron microscopy. Fully recovered cells were 3D reconstructed with Neurolucida (MBF Bioscience, Williston, VT) system using a 100× objective (N = 1.3). Lengths of dendrites were measured only on completely reconstructed dendritic arborizations.
Fast spiking, parvalbumin (PV) expressing hippocampal interneurons are classified into basket, axo-axonic (chandelier), and bistratified cells. These cell classes play key roles in regulating local circuit operations and rhythmogenesis by releasing GABA in precise temporal patterns onto distinct domains of principal cells. In this study, we show that each of the three major PV cell classes further splits into functionally distinct sub-classes during fast network events in vivo. During the slower (<10 Hz) theta oscillations, each cell class exhibited its own characteristic, relatively uniform firing behavior. However, during faster (>90 Hz) oscillations, within-class differences in PV interneuron discharges emerged, which segregated along specific features of dendritic structure or somatic location. Functional divergence of PV sub-classes during fast but not slow network oscillations effectively doubles the repertoire of spatio-temporal patterns of GABA release available for rapid circuit operations.
The brain continuously processes information from outside and inside the body to cope with the challenges of everyday life. As the brain carries out these processes, networks of neurons produce patterns of electrical activities called oscillations.