 Animals make choices that enhance their chances of positive reinforcement (Thorndike, 1898). Laboratory-based tasks have investigated reward-guided decision-making by requiring successive, independent choices to be made in pursuit of a primary reinforcer (e.g., juice) or a flexible resource (e.g., money). For example, on each trial participants might be asked to choose between one of two abstract symbols to obtain a variable monetary reward (Daw et al., 2006), or decide which of two snacks they would like to eat upon completion of the experiment (Lim et al., 2011). In these tasks, decisions are often characterised by stereotyped biases that hinder outcome maximisation, including a tendency to weight losses more heavily than gains (loss aversion) (Tversky and Kahneman, 1991; Tom et al., 2007), or an undue preference for an already endowed or ‘default’ option (status quo bias) (Kahneman et al., 1991; De Martino et al., 2009; Fleming et al., 2010). In conjunction with single-cell recordings (Tremblay and Schultz, 1999; Shidara and Richmond, 2002; Padoa-Schioppa and Assad, 2006; Hayden et al., 2011; Kennerley et al., 2011) or functional neuroimaging (Plassmann et al., 2007; Basten et al., 2010; Hare et al., 2011; Lim et al., 2011; Hunt et al., 2012; Kolling et al., 2012; Boorman et al., 2013), studies have revealed that two interconnected medial cortical regions, the dorsal anterior cingulate cortex (dACC) and the rostromedial prefrontal cortex (rmPFC), play a pivotal role in reward-guided decision-making, although the relative contribution of these regions remains a focus of lively debate (Kable and Glimcher, 2009; Rangel and Hare, 2010; Rushworth et al., 2011). On each block, participants (n = 20, performing the task in the fMRI scanner) viewed spirals of variable length associated with four options (bandits, indexed i). On each trial, each spiral of length si was drawn from a Gaussian distribution with mean vi that remained unchanged for that bandit during a block of 12 trials (see Figure 1A and ‘Materials and methods’). On each trial of a given block, a virtual pool of assets contained the preferred bandits thus far. The contents of the asset pool were converted to monetary reward, as we describe below. Each bandit yielded a monetary payoff (μi) determined by the rank of its mean vi relative to the mean of all four bandits in the block (longer spirals were associated with greater payoff). After viewing the spiral participants chose whether to commit to that bandit, or to defer. Critically, commitment engendered a sustained alteration in the per-trial economic yield, in a manner that varied according to rule type (‘rule-in’ vs ‘rule-out’). On rule-in blocks, participants began the block with an empty pool of assets and the per-trial momentary yield was determined by the average payoff of all bandits committed to (accepted) thus far (Figure 1A: upper panel and ‘Materials and methods’). On rule-out blocks, participants' asset pool initially included all four alternatives and the per-trial yield was the average of the payoff of all bandits not yet committed to (not yet rejected, Figure 1A: lower panel). The total yield at the end of a block was the sum of the per-trial yields (see example in ‘Materials and methods’). Per-block yield was converted to a real financial incentive via a lottery procedure at the end of each run of the experiment.10.7554/eLife.03701.003Figure 1.Block timeline and task design.(A) Upper left inset box: in the two examples, preference and anti-preference for a bandit is indicated with an open circle and triangle, respectively. Upper right inset box: showing the mapping between mean spiral length and payoff (H for high and L for low) of the four bandits in the example blocks. Upper panel: example of a rule-in block. Following an instruction screen, on each trial (grey panels) four bandits (colored boxes) were presented. A spiral in one box provided a noisy estimate of bandit mean length. Bandits that were accepted were made unavailable (greyed out) for future choices (trial 4). Accepted bandits were brought irrevocably into a virtual ‘asset pool’ (light gray circle) that began empty (trial 3). The per-trial yield, that is, the average of the payoffs of all bandits in the asset pool, was aggregated to provide the block-end yield. After 12 trials a feedback screen revealed each bandit’s nominal length and winnings. Bottom panel: same as upper, but for a rule-out block. All bandits began in the asset pool. Rejection eliminated one bandit from the pool (trials 2 and 5). Per-trial yield reflected the average payoff of bandits not yet eliminated from the asset pool. (B) The bandits’ length distributions could vary across 2-variance level (purple/grey). Payoff reflected the rank order of a bandit‘s mean spiral length within the block. The average mean length of the 4 bandits ranged from 2.5 to 5 (see ‘Materials and methods’) and was manipulated across 3 levels corresponding to three different context types.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.03701.003 Previous studies have examined the neural mechanisms of economic behavior by offering participants a succession of independent gambles or unrelated consumer choices (Daw et al., 2006; Plassmann et al., 2007; Lim et al., 2013). Here, we devised a task in which decisions involved commitment to an asset with enduring financial consequences. Whereas previous tasks have sought to mimic the experience of a gambler choosing which one-armed bandit has the highest yield, our experiment captures that of a consumer deciding to sell an ageing car or of an animal electing whether to accept a prospective mate. This approach thus allowed us to model the factors that drive everyday economic commitments, and to measure how brain activity differed when commitments were made relative to when they were deferred to a later time. 21 healthy right-handed adults (mean age = 26.8 ± 3.7 years; 10 females) gave informed consent to participate in two experimental sessions (a practice session, and an fMRI session) conducted on different days, and were compensated £40 plus up to £20 in performance-dependent bonuses. One participant was excluded from subsequent analyses because of failure to comply with the task instructions.
Neurobiologists have studied decisions by offering successive, independent choices between goods or gambles. However, choices often have lasting consequences, as when investing in a house or choosing a partner. Here, humans decided whether to commit (by acceptance or rejection) to prospects that provided sustained financial return. BOLD signals in the rostral medial prefrontal cortex (rmPFC) encoded stimulus value only when acceptance or rejection was deferred into the future, suggesting a role in integrating value signals over time. By contrast, the dorsal anterior cingulate cortex (dACC) encoded stimulus value only when participants rejected (or deferred accepting) a prospect. dACC BOLD signals reflected two decision biases-to defer commitments to later, and to weight potential losses more heavily than gains-that (paradoxically) maximised reward in this task. These findings offer fresh insights into the pressures that shape economic decisions, and the computation of value in the medial prefrontal cortex.
Humans, in general, are not particularly good at making economic decisions. People can be influenced by unhelpful biases: such as ‘loss aversion’ where a person views losses as more significant than gains. Sometimes these biases stop us making the decisions that offer the best reward, as such, they raise the question: why do these biases exist at all?