 Animals use endogenous circadian pacemakers to control their physiology and behavior with roughly 24-hr periodicity (Bass and Takahashi, 2010; Thut et al., 2012). Intracellular timekeeping mechanisms include transcriptional feedback loops, which involve many key genes in Drosophila. They include period (per), timeless (tim), clock (clk), cycle (cyc), and doubletime (dbt). Coordination of their encoded protein activities (period, PER; timeless, TIM; clock, CLK; cycle, CYC: and doubletime, DBT) contributes to the intracellular cycling of the molecular pacemaker, which is similar between flies and mammals (Dubruille and Emery, 2008; Menet and Rosbash, 2011). PER and TIM concentrations increase during the day, and they eventually negatively regulate their own transcription. Biochemical oscillations in the head occur in part through a direct interaction of PER and TIM with the positive transcription factor CLK: CYC (Dubruille and Emery, 2008; Menet and Rosbash, 2011). They also require the photoreceptor cryptochrome (CRY) as well as a cycling light:dark (LD) environment, that is, RNA and protein oscillations damp rapidly in constant darkness (Stanewsky et al., 1998). The central brain is probably different as its molecular and behavioral rhythms persist in constant darkness and is CRY-independent (Stanewsky et al., 1998). To address further the roles of M and E cells, we made use of a recently described DvPdf-GAL4 driver, which expresses strongly and specifically in the M cells and subsets of the E cells. To verify this expression pattern, we crossed DvPdf-GAL4 with UAS-mCD8::GFP. Exactly as reported (Bahn et al., 2009), GFP is expressed in the PDF-positive LNv cells and in several E cells in each hemisphere (Figure 1A); the latter consist of the single PDF-negative 5th-sLNv (Figure 1C) and 4 LNds (subsequently referred to as the 5 Dv-E cells). Cell identification of these circadian neurons was confirmed by co-staining with anti-PER antibodies (Figure 1A).10.7554/eLife.02780.003Figure 1.Characterization of the five E cells labeled by DvPdf-GAL4, Pdf-GAL80.(A) The brain expression pattern of DvPdf-GAL4; UAS-mCD8::GFP flies. Immunostaining with anti-PER only (red, left panel) and with anti-GFP (green) as well as anti-PER (right panel). GFP and PER co-localize in the PDF positive cells, LNds and the 5th-sLNv. The scale bar = 50 μm. A maximum intensity projection of confocal image stacks containing the cell bodies regions is shown. (B) Rescue of PER expression with DvPdf-GAL4 in a per0 background restores both morning and evening anticipation peaks. per0 flies have no morning and evening anticipation peaks (left panel), whereas per0; DvPdf-GAL4; UAS-per flies show normal morning and evening peaks (right panel). Black and gray arrows point to morning and evening anticipation peaks, respectively. White and black bars indicate activity events/30 min bin during the day and night of the LD cycle. Error bars represent standard error of the mean (SEM). n = 15-16 for each group. (C) GFP immunostaining of DvPdf-GAL4, Pdf-GAL80; UAS-mCD8::GFP flies. GFP (red) is expressed in 3-4 LNds and the 5th-sLNv (middle panel), and PDF (green) is expressed in the large and small LNvs (left panel). The white arrow shows additional tracts from Dv-E cells that project to the accessory medulla (aMe). The scale bar = 50 μm. (D) Averaged group activity profiles from UAS-DBTs expressed with Pdf-GAL4, Clk4.1m-GAL4 and DvPdf-GAL4, Pdf-GAL80 flies. The black arrow shows the advanced evening anticipation peak. Averaged over 2 days of LD data. White and black bars indicate activity events/30 min bin during the day and night of the LD cycle, respectively. Error bars represent standard error of the mean (SEM). n = 15-16 for each group.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.02780.003 Diurnal behavior in Drosophila is currently best explained by a dual-oscillator model, which emphasizes the M cells as master pacemakers and the E cells as secondary slave oscillators. Here we provide a modified configuration with a more prominent role for 5 Dv-E cells (Figure 9). This view is based on several new and unanticipated results. First, the 5 Dv-E cells are not only responsible for the evening anticipation peak and its timing, but they also contribute to the morning peak, free running rhythms and total activity. Otherwise put, these cells appear to play a key role in all aspects of circadian rhythms and locomotor activity. Second, E cell resetting can occur in a non cell-autonomous manner, through M cell neuron firing, PDF release and E cell PDFR activation. Third, TIM level changes within the 5 Dv-E cells in response to M cell firing likely make a major contribution to the resulting phase changes, at least in the early night when phase delays occur, and therefore make a major contribution to circadian timekeeping under more normal LD conditions. DvPdf-GAL4 was provided by Dr. JH Park; per0;UAS-per was from Dr. Francois Rouyer; UAS-dTrpA1 was from Dr. Paul Garrity; pdfr5304; UAS-PDFR were from Dr. Paul Taghert; pdf-GSG was from Dr. Fernanda Ceriani ; the cry01 mutant was from Dr. JC. Hall; UAS-TNT and UAS-Tet were from Dr. Hubert Amrein; UAS-DBTs was from Dr. Jeffrey Price; UAS-SGG; Pdf-GAL4, Pdf-GAL80, Cry-GAL80 were described by Stoleru et al. (2004); UAS-p2x2 was from Dr. Orie Shafer; UAS-CUL-3 RNAi 1 (VDRC 25875), UAS-CUL-3 RNAi 2 (VDRC 109415), UAS-PDF RNAi (VDRC 4382), UAS-Trh RNAi (VDRC 105414) were from VDRC. UAS-CUL-3 RNAi 3 (BL 36684) was from Bloomington stock center. All of the other GAL4 and UAS lines were obtained from the Bloomington stock center. Flies were reared on standard cornmeal/agar medium supplemented with yeast. The adult flies were entrained in 12:12 light-dark (LD) cycles at 25°C. The flies carrying GAL4 and UAS-dTrpA1 were kept at 21°C to inhibit dTrpA1 activity.
Our experiments address two long-standing models for the function of the Drosophila brain circadian network: a dual oscillator model, which emphasizes the primacy of PDF-containing neurons, and a cell-autonomous model for circadian phase adjustment. We identify five different circadian (E) neurons that are a major source of rhythmicity and locomotor activity. Brief firing of PDF cells at different times of day generates a phase response curve (PRC), which mimics a light-mediated PRC and requires PDF receptor expression in the five E neurons. Firing also resembles light by causing TIM degradation in downstream neurons. Unlike light however, firing-mediated phase-shifting is CRY-independent and exploits the E3 ligase component CUL-3 in the early night to degrade TIM. Our results suggest that PDF neurons integrate light information and then modulate the phase of E cell oscillations and behavioral rhythms. The results also explain how fly brain rhythms persist in constant darkness and without CRY.
Most animals have daily rhythms of activity: some are awake during the day and asleep at night, whilst others are more active at night, or during the twilight hours around dawn and dusk. These cycles of activity are driven by an internal body clock, which is reset in response to external cues, like light and temperature, and which keeps the animal in sync with the day-night cycle.