 Theta oscillations (4–12 Hz) are one of the most prominent rhythms in the mammalian brain (Vanderwolf, 1969; Buzsáki et al., 1983; Colgin, 2013). Theta is a distributed oscillation, which is broadly coherent between the left and right hippocampi, the entorhinal cortex, the medial septum, and various other cortical and subcortical recipients of hippocampal projections (Buzsáki, 2002). Neural activity is highly structured within each cycle of theta, with the firing rates of genetically defined cell types peaking at different phases (Klausberger et al., 2003, 2004, 2005). Spatially selective principal cells in the hippocampus fire at progressively earlier phases of theta as animals traverse their individual place fields, a phenomenon known as phase precession (O'Keefe and Recce, 1993; Schmidt and Lipson, 2009). Thus, the information content of hippocampal outputs changes throughout each cycle (Mehta et al., 2000, 2002). We trained mice on a navigation task that required encoding and retrieval of reward location on individual trials. Mice were placed on an H-shaped track, which consisted of two choice points separated by a central arm (Jones and Wilson, 2005) (Figure 1A). At one junction, a movable barrier forced mice to make a left or right turn in order to arrive at the start location. At the other junction, mice were free to turn in either direction. A food reward was delivered only if mice chose the arm closest to the most recent start location.10.7554/eLife.03061.003Figure 1.Overview of the behavioral task.(A) Scale drawing of the end-to-end T-maze used in all experiments. On each trial, mice navigate through the ‘retrieval segment’ in the direction of the solid arrow and must choose between one of two reward sites. Reward is delivered for trajectories that involve two turns in the same direction (e.g., the ‘left/left’ trajectory shown). Once the reward site is reached, mice must travel back to one of two start locations in order to initiate the next trial. A movable barrier determines the start location for that trial, and hence which reward site will contain the food pellet. The barrier is repositioned randomly after each visit to a reward site (whether correct or incorrect). A second barrier (not shown) prevents mice from navigating between reward sites after a decision has been made. The maze is surrounded by 10 cm walls made of clear acrylic, through which distal cues are visible. (B) Fraction of correct trials in each session leading up to the start of optogenetic stimulation for N = 4 individual mice (open shapes) and the mean plus-minus SEM. across all subjects (5-day running average). In the 5 days before the start of optogenetic stimulation (shaded region), all mice perform significantly above chance (p<0.05, based on p.d.f. of the binomial distribution with probability of 0.5). (C) Trials per minute for the same sessions as in C. Mean for last 5 days (shaded region) is 36.1 plus-minus 18.3 trials per session per mouse.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.03061.003 These results provide new evidence for a hypothesis that was previously supported by correlational studies and computational models: processes related to encoding new information and retrieving stored information occur preferentially at different phases of the theta oscillation (Hasselmo et al., 2002; Hasselmo, 2005; Colgin et al., 2009; Colgin and Moser, 2010). We have shown that interventions targeting the falling or rising phases of theta have different effects depending on the behavioral context. When environmental cues to reward location are available (as in the encoding segment of the task), triggering hippocampal inhibition on the peak of theta enhanced navigational accuracy. When behavioral guidance must be based on internal signals alone (as in the retrieval segment of the task), triggering hippocampal inhibition on the trough of theta increased the probability of a correct choice. All mice were male parvalbumin-Cre (PV-Cre) heterozygotes, derived from PV-Cre BAC transgenics back-crossed into a C57BL/6J line (Jackson Laboratory strain B6; 129P2-Pvalbtm1(cre)Arbr). Mice were 8–12 weeks old at the start of training (mean age = 10.8 plus-minus 1.5 weeks) and 10–15 weeks old at the time of surgery (mean age = 13.5 plus-minus 2.1 weeks). Animals were individually housed and maintained on a 12-hr light/dark cycle (lights on at 7:00 AM). All experimental procedures and animal care protocols were approved by the Massachusetts Institute of Technology Institutional Animal Care and Use Committees and were in accordance with NIH guidelines.
Assessing the behavioral relevance of the hippocampal theta rhythm has proven difficult, due to a shortage of experiments that selectively manipulate phase-specific information processing. Using closed-loop stimulation, we triggered inhibition of dorsal CA1 at specific phases of the endogenous theta rhythm in freely behaving mice. This intervention enhanced performance on a spatial navigation task that requires the encoding and retrieval of information related to reward location on every trial. In agreement with prior models of hippocampal function, the behavioral effects depended on both the phase of theta and the task segment at which we stimulated. Stimulation in the encoding segment enhanced performance when inhibition was triggered by the peak of theta. Conversely, stimulation in the retrieval segment enhanced performance when inhibition was triggered by the trough of theta. These results suggest that processes related to the encoding and retrieval of task-relevant information are preferentially active at distinct phases of theta.
Around 15 years ago, an imaging study compared the brains of London taxi drivers—who need to know their way around one of the biggest cities in the world—with those of the general public, and found that a structure called the hippocampus was routinely larger in the taxi drivers. This finding was consistent with previous studies from rats, which showed that anatomical changes occur in the hippocampus after animals learn to navigate through various mazes. Together, these results suggest that the hippocampus is important for spatial awareness in both humans and rodents.