 Reward and punishment play critical roles in shaping animal behavior over short and long timescales (Rolls, 2005; Somerville et al., 2013). On short timescales, moment-to-moment expectations of reward or punishment increase or decrease motivation to perform a specific action associated with the reward or punishment. On long timescales, repeated exposure to reward or punishment can elicit long-lasting positive or negative emotional states (often called ‘mood’), that can increase or decrease the frequency of performing reward-seeking actions more generally (Niv et al., 2006; Cools et al., 2011; Somerville et al., 2013; Wang et al., 2013). We classically conditioned head-fixed, thirsty mice with different odor cues that predicted a reward (water), neutral outcome (nothing), or punishment (a puff of air delivered to the animal's face; Cohen et al., 2012). Each behavioral trial began with a conditioned stimulus (CS; an odor, 1 s), followed by a 1-s delay and an unconditioned stimulus (US; the outcome; Figure 1A). Mice licked toward the water-delivery tube in the delay period before rewards arrived, but not during neutral or punishment trials, indicating that they had learned the CS-US associations (analysis of variance (ANOVA), t-tests, p < 0.001 for each session; Figure 1B). We varied the structure of the task so that animals received blocks of 10 reward trials, alternating with 10 punishment trials, with a tone indicating transitions between blocks (or, in 35% of sessions, block order was random; Figure 1C; block duration mean ± S.D., 1.36 ± 0.30 min). Mice licked significantly more during the tone preceding reward vs punishment blocks. Because the tone was the same preceding both block types, this indicates that they attended to the block structure (Wilcoxon signed-rank test, p < 0.01; Figure 1—figure supplement 1). In each block of some sessions, the reward or punishment trial was replaced by a neutral trial with probability 0.1. To ensure that the time of onset of each trial could not be predicted following the end of the previous one, we used an exponentially-distributed (flat hazard rate) inter-trial interval (ITI). The ITIs lasted, on average, longer than twice the duration of trials (ITI, 6.41 ± 1.88 s, mean ± S.D.). Using this task, we could study neuronal responses on fast (CS and US) and slow (across blocks) timescales.10.7554/eLife.06346.003Figure 1.Behavioral task.(A) Structure of individual trials. (B) Average lick rate for all animals during each trial type. (C) Representative sequence of trials from one experiment. Each point represents an odor cue. Shaded regions indicate reward blocks. (D) Schematic of midbrain indicating recording sites (shaded), with low and high magnification of 5-HT labeling (cyan), ChR2-EYFP (magenta), nuclei (DAPI), and their overlay. Scale bars are 100 µm and 10 µm for low and high magnification, respectively.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.06346.00310.7554/eLife.06346.004Figure 1—figure supplement 1.Histogram of lick rate during tones indicating block transitions, for experiments in which reward blocks alternated with punishment blocks.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.06346.00410.7554/eLife.06346.005Figure 1—figure supplement 2.Mice treat air puffs as punishments.(A) Mice performed a two-alternative forced choice task, in which they chose between a water reward and a water reward together with an air puff, indicating their response by moving to the associated response port. (B) Task timing, in which an odor cue in a central port signals a choice, followed by an outcome. (C) Median (horizontal line), interquartile range (box), and 1.5 times interquartile range (whiskers) of proportion of water choices for each mouse, across five experiments of 300 trials each. Each mouse chose water over water together with air puffs significantly more than chance (Tukey's Honest Significant Difference tests, p < 0.001).DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.06346.005 By recording from identified serotonergic neurons, we showed that (1) a large fraction of serotonergic neurons showed tonic firing modulation depending on state value on long timescales (tens of seconds to minutes); (2) serotonergic neurons phasically responded (mostly by excitation) to punishments; and (3) a subset of serotonergic neurons was phasically excited by reward-predicting cues. These observations showed that serotonergic neurons signal reward and punishment on multiple timescales. For dorsal raphe recordings, we used nine adult male mice, backcrossed with C57BL/6J mice, heterozygous for Cre recombinase under the control of the serotonin transporter gene (Slc6a4tm1(cre)Xz; Zhuang et al., 2005). For VTA recordings, all of which came from the task in Figure 1, we used four adult male mice backcrossed with C57BL/6J mice, heterozygous for Cre recombinase under the control of either the dopamine transporter (3 mice) or tyrosine hydroxylase gene (1 mouse) (Slc6a3tm1.1(cre)Bkmn/J and B6.Cg-Tg(Th-cre)1tmd/J, respectively, The Jackson Laboratory; Savitt et al., 2005; Bäckman et al., 2006). We did not observe any differences between the different genotypes during the behavioral task. For cell counting, we used three additional adult male Sert-Cre mice. Animals were housed on a 12 hr dark/12 hr light cycle (dark from 06:00-18:00) and each performed the conditioning task at the same time of day, between 07:00 and 19:00. All surgical and experimental procedures were in accordance with the National Institutes of Health Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals and approved by the Harvard or Johns Hopkins Institutional Animal Care and Use Committees.
Serotonin's function in the brain is unclear. One challenge in testing the numerous hypotheses about serotonin's function has been observing the activity of identified serotonergic neurons in animals engaged in behavioral tasks. We recorded the activity of dorsal raphe neurons while mice experienced a task in which rewards and punishments varied across blocks of trials. We ‘tagged’ serotonergic neurons with the light-sensitive protein channelrhodopsin-2 and identified them based on their responses to light. We found three main features of serotonergic neuron activity: (1) a large fraction of serotonergic neurons modulated their tonic firing rates over the course of minutes during reward vs punishment blocks; (2) most were phasically excited by punishments; and (3) a subset was phasically excited by reward-predicting cues. By contrast, dopaminergic neurons did not show firing rate changes across blocks of trials. These results suggest that serotonergic neurons signal information about reward and punishment on multiple timescales.
Rewards and punishments can both encourage animals to change their immediate behavior and influence their mood over a longer term, particularly when given repeatedly. A region of the brain that increases its activity in response to rewards and punishments also contains many neurons that communicate with each other by releasing a chemical called serotonin. This chemical is commonly thought to produce feelings of happiness; however, it remains unclear exactly how these particular ‘serotonergic’ neurons help to process rewards and punishments.