 The vertebrate nervous system is highly evolved to extract, integrate, retrieve, and transform information, a functional sophistication that is mirrored in the complexity of its underlying neural circuits. These circuits are produced by precisely orchestrated patterns of neuronal proliferation, migration, and differentiation, and by the establishment of specific synaptic connections between neurons and their targets. For neurons with distant targets, making the appropriate connections depends on accurate long-range navigation by their growing axons (Dickson, 2002; O’Donnell et al., 2009). Fz3 is widely expressed in the developing mouse CNS, and therefore it seemed possible that its loss might impair neurodevelopmental processes other than those previously described in the forebrain (Wang et al., 2002, 2006b). To systematically assess peripheral axon growth and guidance in E11.5-E13.5 embryos, we visualized Neurofilament-M (hereafter ‘NF’) immunoreactivity in whole-mount tissues and in thick (0.7-1 mm) vibratome sections. We also used the Hb9-EGFP transgene to visualize spinal motor axons, including the phrenic nerve, and the motor component of a subset of cranial nerves (Wichterle et al., 2002; Huettl and Huber, 2011). The experiments reported here establish a role for Frizzled signaling in the growth of a subset of cranial and spinal motor axons. In the absence of Fz3, innervation is decreased or entirely missing from the musculature of the tongue, snout, diaphragm, and the dorsal (which will later become the anterior) compartment of the lower hindlimbs. In the limb, the Fz3−/− phenotype is distinct from several previously described axon guidance phenotypes. Fz3−/− LMCL axons, which are normally destined to innervate the dorsal limb musculature, stall abruptly within the plexus and do not adopt a default trajectory as observed in embryos with loss of EphrinA/EphA4, Sema3F/Npn2, and GDNF/Ret signaling. The loss of Fz3 also leads to the precocious apoptotic death of affected cranial and spinal motor neurons, a phenotype not observed in embryos with defective EphrinA/EphA4 and GDNF/Ret signaling (Helmbacher et al., 2000; Kramer et al., 2006). To the best of our knowledge, the only previously reported mammalian axon guidance phenotype that might resemble the Fz3−/− phenotype to some extent is that seen in the absence of Linx, a transmembrane protein of the LIG family that has been implicated as a cofactor in receptor tyrosine kinase signaling (MacLaren et al., 2004; Mandai et al., 2009). The Fz3CKO allele was generated by homologous recombination in mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells using standard techniques. The targeting construct contained exon 3 with 3.4 kb of 5′ and 6.4 kb of 3′ flanking intronic sequences. An HA epitope was inserted in the linker region that connects the cysteine-rich ligand-binding domain and the first transmembrane domain (a region encoded in the third exon). A neomycin phosphotransferase (neo) selection marker with flanking Frt sites was inserted 3′ of exon 3, and LoxP sites were placed 5′ of exon 3 and 3′ of neo (Figure 6—figure supplement 1A). The targeting construct was electroporated into R1 mouse ES cells, and colonies were grown in medium containing G418 and ganclovir. Colonies were screened by Southern blot hybridization, and positive clones were injected into C57BL/6 blastocysts to generate chimeric founders. Germline transmission was confirmed by Southern blot hybridization and PCR. The neo cassette was removed by crossing to germline Flp mice (Rodriguez et al., 2000).
Disruption of the Frizzled3 (Fz3) gene leads to defects in axonal growth in the VIIth and XIIth cranial motor nerves, the phrenic nerve, and the dorsal motor nerve in fore- and hindlimbs. In Fz3−/− limbs, dorsal axons stall at a precise location in the nerve plexus, and, in contrast to the phenotypes of several other axon path-finding mutants, Fz3−/− dorsal axons do not reroute to other trajectories. Affected motor neurons undergo cell death 2 days prior to the normal wave of developmental cell death that coincides with innervation of muscle targets, providing in vivo evidence for the idea that developing neurons with long-range axons are programmed to die unless their axons arrive at intermediate targets on schedule. These experiments implicate planar cell polarity (PCP) signaling in motor axon growth and they highlight the question of how PCP proteins, which form cell-cell complexes in epithelia, function in the dynamic context of axonal growth.
For the nervous system to become wired up correctly, neurons within the developing embryo must project over long distances to form connections with remote targets. They do this by lengthening their axons—the ‘cables’ along which electrical signals flow—and some axons in adult humans can grow to be more than 1 metre long.