 The presence of large-scale distributed networks of temporally correlated spontaneous activity is a well-established phenomenon in neuroimaging (Biswal et al., 1995; Fox and Raichle, 2007; Raichle et al., 2001). These so-called resting state networks (RSNs) have been consistently identified across different subjects in the absence of any explicit task from covariations in the blood oxygenation level dependent (BOLD) signal, as measured by functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) (Beckmann et al., 2005; Damoiseaux et al., 2006; Smith et al., 2009). These networks are known to have functional relevance and clinical significance (Greicius et al., 2004; Filippini et al., 2009). We recorded 10 min of resting state MEG data from nine healthy subjects. We applied beamforming and frequency filtering to derive spatially and spectrally resolved estimates of neuronal activity. Data across multiple subjects were temporally concatenated resulting in a single group data matrix from which an HMM with 8 states was inferred (see ‘Materials and methods’). The inferred HMM states represent unique spatiotemporal patterns of activity (band-limited amplitude fluctuations) that repeat at different points in time (Rezek and Roberts, 2005). We have characterized whole-brain spontaneous activity based on time-varying behavior of source localized MEG signals. Using a distinct methodology that is able to resolve changes in functional connectivity at high temporal resolution, we identified short-lived (100-200 ms) states that represent unique spatiotemporal patterns of neural activity. The inferred states revealed spatial topographies that represent networks of spatially segregated brain regions that bear a strong similarity to seed based correlation or ICA derived RSNs in both MEG and fMRI. By assessing temporal changes in the occurrence of these states, we demonstrated that within-network functional connectivity is underpinned by neuronal dynamics that fluctuate much more rapidly than has previously been shown. Resting state MEG data were acquired from nine healthy subjects. The subjects were asked to lie in the scanner with their eyes open while 10 min of data were recorded. The MEG data were acquired using a 275 channel CTF whole-head system (MISL, Conquitlam, Canada) at a sampling rate of 600 Hz with a 150 Hz low pass anti-aliasing filter. Synthetic third order gradiometer correction was applied to reduce external interference. Localization of the head within the MEG helmet was achieved using three electromagnetic head position indicator (HPI) coils. By periodically energizing these coils their position within the MEG sensor array was identified. Prior to data acquisition, the HPI coil locations, the position of three fiducial points (the nasion, and left and right preauricular points), and the head shape were recorded using a three-dimensional digitizer (Polhemus Isotrack). MR images were acquired using a 3T Phillips Achieva MR system at 1 × 1 × 1 mm3 resolution running an MPRAGE sequence. Each subject’s structural MRI was registered to the MNI152 standard brain such that all subsequent source space analysis was performed in MNI space. The locations of the MEG sensors with respect to the anatomy were determined by registering the digitized head surface to the head surface extracted from the structural MRI.
To provide an effective substrate for cognitive processes, functional brain networks should be able to reorganize and coordinate on a sub-second temporal scale. We used magnetoencephalography recordings of spontaneous activity to characterize whole-brain functional connectivity dynamics at high temporal resolution. Using a novel approach that identifies the points in time at which unique patterns of activity recur, we reveal transient (100-200 ms) brain states with spatial topographies similar to those of well-known resting state networks. By assessing temporal changes in the occurrence of these states, we demonstrate that within-network functional connectivity is underpinned by coordinated neuronal dynamics that fluctuate much more rapidly than has previously been shown. We further evaluate cross-network interactions, and show that anticorrelation between the default mode network and parietal regions of the dorsal attention network is consistent with an inability of the system to transition directly between two transient brain states.
When subjects lie motionless inside scanners without any particular task to perform, their brains show stereotyped patterns of activity across regions known as resting state networks. Each network consists of areas with a common function, such as the ‘motor’ network or the ‘visual’ network. The role of resting state networks is unclear, but these spontaneous activity patterns are altered in disorders including autism, schizophrenia, and Alzheimer’s disease.