 The nanopeptide bradykinin (Bk) is an important mediator of pain and inflammation (Dray and Perkins, 1993; Calixto et al., 2000). It causes hyperalgesia (Manning et al., 1991; Dalmolin et al., 2007) by exciting and/or sensitizing components of the pain pathway, including primary afferent terminals, sensory ganglia, and dorsal horn neurons (Dray and Perkins, 1988; Dray et al., 1988; Thayer et al., 1988; McGuirk and Dolphin, 1992; Rueff and Dray, 1993; Jeftinija, 1994; Cesare et al., 1999; Wang et al., 2005). Consistent with this, systemic blockade of Bk receptors produces analgesia (Steranka et al., 1988; Correa and Calixto, 1993; Perkins et al., 1993; Levy and Zochodne, 2000; Ferreira et al., 2002). From an in vitro hemicord preparation, the direct application of Bk (4-8 µM) above the ventral horn column (L3-L5, Figure 1A) evoked sustained ventral root activity without inducing antidromic discharge from the dorsal roots (Figure 1B, left). This motor output was not exclusively caused by local reverberating circuits, because it persisted in the presence of the glutamate receptor antagonist kynurenate at a concentration that blocked the monosynaptic reflex (1.5 mM, Figure 1B, right and Figure 1C). We tested whether a change in the motoneuronal processing of sensory inputs by Bk might contribute to an increase in the motor output. To avoid sustained ventral root discharge, subthreshold concentrations of Bk (0.5-1 µM) were used. With these low concentrations of Bk, the motoneuron spiking probability in response to supramaximal dorsal root stimulation was increased (Figure 1D-F). Specifically, Bk had no effect on the transient short latency reflexes (number of events: 144 ± 16 for control vs 143 ± 14 during Bk; p = 0.68, Wilcoxon paired test, n = 7) but recruited a long-lasting reflex (number of events: 537 ± 104 for control vs 2493 ± 1207 during Bk; p = 0.015, Wilcoxon paired test, n = 7) such that the distribution of peristimulus time histograms (PSTHs) shifted from unimodal to bimodal (Figure 1E,F). This long-lasting reflex has been previously shown to result from sustained firing of motoneurons involved in muscle spasms (Bennett et al., 2004; Li et al., 2004).10.7554/eLife.06195.003Figure 1.Bradykinin potentiates the gain of sensory inputs into the motor system.(A) Drawing of a midsagittally hemisected rat spinal cord illustrating localized Bk application to the lumbar motor column, and dorsal (DR) and ventral (VR) roots used for reflex testing. (B) Responses to ventral application of bradykinin (Bk, 4 µM pipette concentration) recorded via the lumbar L5 dorsal (DR L5) and ventral (VR L5) roots before (left) and after (right) the fast glutamatergic synaptic transmission was blocked by kynurenate (1.5 mM). (C) Ventral root response to ipsilateral dorsal root stimulation before (left) and after (right) application of kynurenate (1.5 mM). Single arrows indicate the monosynaptic reflex (mono) and the stimulus artifact (stim). (D) Five superimposed responses recorded from an L5 ventral root induced by stimulations of the ipsilateral dorsal root before (control, black trace) and after local application of low concentrations of Bk (1 µM pipette concentration, red trace). (E) Average peristimulus time histogram (PSTH, bin width: 20 ms) of L5 ventral root recordings collected before (black) and after (red) the local application of Bk (1 µM pipette concentration). (F) Group means quantification of the PSTH for the transient short latency and long-lasting reflexes computed over a window 10-40 ms and 500-4000 ms post stimulus, respectively, before (black) and after (red) local application of Bk. Error bars indicate SEM. *p < 0.05 (Wilcoxon paired test).DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.06195.00310.7554/eLife.06195.004Figure 1—figure supplement 1.At the right, five superimposed responses recorded under spantide (2 µM) from the L5 ventral root of an hemichord preparation and induced by stimulations of the ipsilateral dorsal root before (control, black trace) and after local application of low concentrations of Bk (1 µM pipette concentration, red trace).At the left, group means quantification of the PSTH for the transient short latency and long-lasting reflexes computed over a window 10-40 ms and 500-4000 ms post stimulus, respectively, before (black) and after (red) local application of Bk. Error bars indicate SEM. ns, not significant,*p < 0.05 (Wilcoxon paired test).DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.06195.004 Here we provide the first evidence supporting the possibility of a direct excitation of rat spinal motoneurons by Bk. Acting mainly through B2 receptors, Bk acts by at least two ionic mechanisms involving a reduction of a resting K+ conductance and activation of a nonselective cationic conductance mediated primarily by Na+. This process is initiated by a [Ca2+]i rise in dendrites triggered by a G-protein-dependent PLC-InsP3 signaling pathway. Experiments were performed on neonatal (0-7 days old) Wistar rats of either sex. We housed rodents in a temperature-controlled animal care facility with a 12-hr light-dark cycle and given ad libitum access to food and water. We made all effort to minimize animal suffering and the number of animals used. We performed experiments in accordance with French regulations (Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Fisheries; Division of Health and Protection of Animals).
Bradykinin (Bk) is a potent inflammatory mediator that causes hyperalgesia. The action of Bk on the sensory system is well documented but its effects on motoneurons, the final pathway of the motor system, are unknown. By a combination of patch-clamp recordings and two-photon calcium imaging, we found that Bk strongly sensitizes spinal motoneurons. Sensitization was characterized by an increased ability to generate self-sustained spiking in response to excitatory inputs. Our pharmacological study described a dual ionic mechanism to sensitize motoneurons, including inhibition of a barium-sensitive resting K+ conductance and activation of a nonselective cationic conductance primarily mediated by Na+. Examination of the upstream signaling pathways provided evidence for postsynaptic activation of B2 receptors, G protein activation of phospholipase C, InsP3 synthesis, and calmodulin activation. This study questions the influence of motoneurons in the assessment of hyperalgesia since the withdrawal motor reflex is commonly used as a surrogate pain model.
When we accidentally place our hand on a hot stove, we normally experience a painful sensation that starts with the sensory nerves under our skin. These nerves respond by transmitting electrical impulses to our brain, where the painful sensation is then processed. At the same time, these impulses are also transmitted to the motor nerves that control the muscles in our hand to trigger an immediate reflex to withdraw the hand from the hot stove. Pain therefore has a useful role as it can reduce how bad an injury is.