 Understanding the nature and impact of the interactions that underlie the behavior of groups of organisms is a central question, shared across biology, physics, psychology, and mathematics. The coherence of ‘collective behavior’ patterns of large groups of animals, such as insect swarms (Buhl et al., 2006; Simpson et al., 2006) fish schools (Sumpter et al., 2008; Katz et al., 2011), bird flocks (Cavagna et al., 2010; Nagy et al., 2010), and human crowds (Song et al., 2010; Gallup et al., 2012), presents us with fundamental questions relating to distributed information processing, computation, and learning. The adequacy of different mathematical models of the interactions between animals in describing the behavior of large groups has therefore been of great interest (Winfree, 1967; Vicsek et al., 1995; Couzin et al., 2002; Lathe, 2004; Couzin et al., 2005; Ben-Jacob, 2009; Cavagna et al., 2010; Lukeman et al., 2010; Nagy et al., 2010; Bialek et al., 2012). We analyzed the behavior of 17 groups of mice, each composed of four adult mice in an arena resembling an ethologically relevant context that has an interesting environment for exploration (see ‘Materials and methods’) (Figure 1A, and Figure 1—figure supplement 1). Mice were raised either in a standard laboratory environment (SE mice; eight groups) or an enriched one (CE mice, nine groups; see ‘Materials and methods’) and studied in the arena using a novel automated system for tracking individual and group behavior simultaneously, with high spatial and temporal resolution. To enable accurate tracking of the mice in their nocturnal phase, we stained their fur with fluorescent hair dyes, illuminated the arena with UVA light, and recorded their activity with a sensitive color camera (Figure 1B). The behavior of each group was recorded at 25 frames/s, over 4 consecutive nights, for 12 hr each night (Figure 1C and Video 1; see ‘Materials and methods’).10.7554/eLife.00759.003Figure 1.Simultaneous tracking of individual mouse behavior in the dark.(A) Top view of the arena showing the 10 regions of interest: (1) open field, (2) Z wall, (3) water, (4 and 5) feeders, (6) on small nest, (7) on large nest, (8) block, (9) in small nest, (10) in large nest. For further details of the arena, see Figure 1—figure supplement 1. (B) Video recording and color-based tracking of a group of mice in the dark. (C) A 15-min segment of the tracked paths of each of the four mice in a group. (D) A ‘heat map’ showing the relative amount of time the mice spent in different parts of the arena. Data shown is from one typical group on the second day of the experiment (red corresponds to highly visited points, and blue to less favorable ones). (E) Individual histograms of the time spent in the different regions of the arena (same group as in D). See legend at the bottom for the color coding of the regions. (F) Distribution of continuous time periods spent by one typical mouse at each region. Most areas show a similar behavior resembling scale free distribution.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.00759.00310.7554/eLife.00759.004Figure 1—figure supplement 1.The color-based tracking system.A special arena for automated tracking of individual and group behavior was designed and constructed. The arena consisted of a 70 cm × 50 cm × 50 cm cage that included several objects: a Z-shaped wall, a water dispenser, two feeders, a small nest and a large nest, an elevated block, and two elevated ramps. Two UVA fluorescent lamps were placed 3 m above the arena floor to illuminate the surrounding area during the night with 370-380 nm wavelength light. During the day the arena was lit by one white-light fluorescent lamp (36W). To prevent reflections from objects in the room, a black curtain was drawn from the fluorescent lights down to the arena. A color sensitive camera was placed 1 m above the arena.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.00759.00410.7554/eLife.00759.005Video 1.Tracking four mice in a semi-natural environment.Each mouse is stained using a different fluorescent hair dye that glows under ‘dark’ light (UVA). The positions of the mice were constantly tracked and the trails are shown in the video. The arena included several objects, which we marked using dashed line in the video. In each frame, the location of all mice is presented in the lower left side of the video by a 4-digit code, which is based on a division of the arena into 10 regions of interest.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.00759.005 Quantifying social interactions presents an ethological challenge both experimentally and theoretically (Adolphs, 2010). While even solitary species display social behavior such as mating, aggression, and maternal care, species that live in groups display profoundly more complex social repertoires (Silk, 2013). This group behavior, ideally dissected into individual and group parts, is also likely to depend on the environmental context (Insel and Fernald, 2004). Thus, understanding group social behavior requires a framework combining an experimental system for recording group behavior with high resolution both spatially and temporally in a reliable manner over long time windows, and a mathematical formalism to quantify the nature of interactions and their contribution to the group’s behavior. Mice were studied in a specialized arena designed for automated tracking of individual and group behavior. The arena consisted of an open 70 cm × 50 cm × 50 cm box and included the following objects: Z-shaped wall, a water dispenser, two feeders, a small nest and a large nest, an elevated block, and two elevated ramps (Figure 1—figure supplement 1). Food and water were given ad libitum. Two UVA fluorescent lamps (18 W) were placed 3 m above the arena’s floor to illuminate the surrounding area with 370-380 nm ‘black light’. To avoid reflections from white objects in the room, a black curtain was drawn from the fluorescent lamps down to the arena. A color sensitive camera (Panasonic Color CCTV, WV-CL924AE) was placed 1 m above the arena. The camera analog input is converted to digital information with a digitizer (Picolo Diligent frame grabber board), and recoded on a standard computer. Mice trajectories were automatically detected offline using specially written software in Matlab (Mathworks, Natick, MA).
Social behavior in mammals is often studied in pairs under artificial conditions, yet groups may rely on more complicated social structures. Here, we use a novel system for tracking multiple animals in a rich environment to characterize the nature of group behavior and interactions, and show strongly correlated group behavior in mice. We have found that the minimal models that rely only on individual traits and pairwise correlations between animals are not enough to capture group behavior, but that models that include third-order interactions give a very accurate description of the group. These models allow us to infer social interaction maps for individual groups. Using this approach, we show that environmental complexity during adolescence affects the collective group behavior of adult mice, in particular altering the role of high-order structure. Our results provide new experimental and mathematical frameworks for studying group behavior and social interactions.
All animals need to interact with others of the same species, even if it is only to mate. To date, social behavior has been studied mainly at two extremes: detailed observation of pairs; and studies of the collective behavior of large groups, such as flocks of birds. However, to gain an understanding of social behavior in mammals will require an approach that falls between these two extremes. It will be necessary to study animals in larger groups, rather than in pairs, but also to track individuals rather than looking at the activity of the group as a whole.