 Cortical plasticity declines with aging, accounting for decreased learning and memory, as well as reduced neural rehabilitation in aging brain ( Singer, 1995 ;  Park and Reuter-Lorenz, 2009 ). Running or other physical exercise has been suggested to improve many aspects of brain function in aging human beings, including brain plasticity ( Voss et al., 2013 ). In aged animals, environmental enrichment has also been shown to improve learning and memory, as well as cortical plasticity; but the underlying circuit mechanisms are unknown ( Vivar et al., 2013 ;  Greifzu et al., 2014 ). Our laboratory recently showed that running enhances both visual cortical responses and plasticity in adult mice ( Niell and Stryker, 2010 ;  Kaneko and Stryker, 2014 ). We also found that running potently activates VIP neurons in mouse primary visual cortex (V1), which in turn inhibit SST inhibitory neurons, thereby disinhibiting the excitatory pyramidal neurons and allowing them to respond more strongly to the visual stimuli for which they are selective ( Fu et al., 2014 ). We also showed that activating VIP neurons is both sufficient and necessary for enhancing visual responses during running ( Fu et al., 2014 ). Therefore, we set out to investigate whether the VIP-SST disinhibitory circuit, rather than general aerobic exercise, is responsible for enhanced cortical plasticity in adult mice. (A) Representative fluorescent images of binocular V1 area from a VIP-Cre mouse injected with AAV-DIO-TeTx-GFP. Slices were immunostained for GFP to indicate viral infected neurons and VIP for VIP-positive neurons. White arrows indicate the cells positive for both GFP and VIP staining. Red arrows indicate the cells stained positive for VIP only; green arrow indicates a cell positive only for GFP. (B) Experimental schedule. (C and D) Changes in intrinsic signal responses evoked by the visual stimulation through the closed eye (C) and the open eye (D) in AAV-DIO-TeTx-injected (VIP-TeTx, n = 5) experimental and PBS-injected control mice (PBS, n = 6). (E) Ocular dominance index (ODI) computed from responses to contralateral (closed) and ipsilateral (open) eyes shown in (C and D). ODI represents normalized difference in response magnitude between the two eyes; higher ODI indicates more domination of the contralateral eye. Open circles represent measurements in individual animals, solid circles indicate mean of the open circles. (Data are plotted as mean ± S.D., ***p < 0.001, **p < 0.01 between groups at given time point; Two-way ANOVA followed by multiple comparisons with Bonferroni correction). We previously showed that running in conjunction with visual stimulation enhanced visual cortical plasticity in a mouse model of human amblyopia ( Kaneko and Stryker, 2014 ). To test the requirement of VIP-cell synaptic transmission in this model, we first sutured closed one eyelid of VIP-Cre mice at ∼P24, before the peak of critical period, and then after 4 months injected 1 µl of AAV-DIO-TeTx or PBS (the vehicle solution for virus) into the binocular zone of V1. After an additional month, we re-opened the closed eye and allowed the animals to run on Styrofoam balls floating on air while viewing a visual stimulus 4 hr per day for 21 days, as described previously ( Kaneko and Stryker, 2014 ). Cortical responses through two eyes were measured by an experimenter blind to the treatment with intrinsic signal imaging immediately after eye opening and every 7 days during the recovery period ( Figure 1B ). Intrinsic signal imaging provides a reliable and non-invasive measurement of visual cortical responses to the two eyes, permitting long-term repeated measurement of the same animal to assess plasticity ( Kaneko et al., 2008 ). Its results have been extensively validated by electrophysiological recordings in previous studies ( Kaneko et al., 2008 ;  Kaneko and Stryker, 2014 ). As expected, the deprived-eye visual responses recovered well in the control PBS-injected VIP-Cre mice, and the ocular dominance index (ODI) reached a level that is similar to non-deprived animals ( Figure 1C-E , black traces, compare to  Figure 1  of  Kaneko and Stryker (2014) ). In contrast, V1 responses to the deprived eye in the AAV-DIO-TeTx injected animals recovered only modestly, even after 21 days (PBS: 1.82 ± 0.26, TeTx: 1.40 ± 0.20, p = 0.006), with an ODI significantly smaller than in the control animals (PBS: 0.249 ± 0.07, TeTx: 0.083 ± 0.02, p = 0.0004;  Figure 1C-E , green traces). Indeed, the poor recovery of AAV-DIO-TeTx injected animals was similar to that of animals that did not run in our previous report ( Kaneko and Stryker, 2014 ), despite the fact that they ran as much as PBS-injected animals (% of running time: TeTx, 67.88 ± 23.6 vs PBS, 68.14 ± 17.57; average running velocity in cm/s: TeTx, 10.78 ± 3.142 vs PBS, 9.43 ± 5.29;  Figure 1—figure supplement 2 ). In these animals, as in all of the TeTx-treated animals described below, we noted no obvious changes in temperament or visual behavior; experimental and control animals appeared indistinguishable. Responses of the open-eye were not significantly changed in either group of animals ( Figure 1D ). Silencing the transmission of VIP neurons thus abolished the effect of running on adult plasticity in this mouse model of amblyopia by reducing the potentiation of deprived-eye responses during recovery. (A) Experimental schedule. (B and C) Amplitudes of intrinsic signal responses evoked by the visual stimulation through the closed eye (B) and the open eye (C) before (baseline) and after 4-day monocular deprivation of the contralateral eye (MD 4d). (D) Ocular dominance index (ODI) computed from response amplitude to contralateral (closed) and ipsilateral (open) eyes shown in (B and C). Open circles represent measurements in individual animals. B6: C57BL/6J wild type mice (VS + run: n = 7; home-cage: n = 5); VIP-TeTx: VIP-Cre mice that received a cortical injection of AAV-DIO-TeTx and treated with VS + run during MD (n = 5). Solid circles represent the average of the corresponding open circles or open triangles (±S.D.). *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01 between baseline and after MD 4d; two-way ANOVA followed by multiple comparisons with Bonferroni correction. (A) Representative fluorescent images of binocular V1 area from a VIP-Cre mouse injected with AAV-DIO-ChETA-YFP. The slices were immunostained for YFP to indicate viral infected neurons and VIP for VIP-positive neurons. White arrows indicate the cells positive for both YFP and VIP staining. (B) Experimental schedule. (C and D) Changes in intrinsic signal responses evoked by the visual stimulation through the closed eye (C) and the open eye (D). VIP-Cre mice were injected with AAV-DIO-ChETA-YFP (VIP-ChETA, n = 4), AAV-DIO-TdTomato (VIP-Tdtm, n = 4), or AAV-ChETA (pyr-ChETA, n = 3). (E) Ocular dominance index (ODI) computed from response amplitude to contralateral (closed) and ipsilateral (open) eyes shown in (C and D). Open circles represent measurements in individual animals, and solid circles indicate mean of the open circles. (Data are plotted as mean ± S.D., *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01; paired t-test for comparing baseline and MD 5d of the VIP-ChETA group; other comparisons were analyzed with the two-way ANOVA followed by multiple comparisons with Bonferroni correction). (A) Representative fluorescent images of the binocular area in V1 from SST-Cre mouse injected with AAV-DIO-TeTx-GFP. The slices were immunostained for GFP to indicate viral infected neurons and SST for SST-positive neurons. White arrows indicate the cells positive for both GFP and SST staining, and green arrow indicates a cell positive only for GFP. (B) Experimental schedule. (C and D) Amplitudes of intrinsic signal responses evoked by visual stimulation through the closed eye (C) and the open eye (D), in SST-Cre mice treated with AAV-DIO-TeTx-GFP (TeTx, n = 5) or with AAV-DIO-TdTomato (Tdtm, n = 7) and in C57BL/6J mice (B6, n = 5). (E) Ocular dominance index (ODI) computed from response amplitude to contralateral (closed) and ipsilateral (open) eyes shown in (C and D). Open circles represent measurements in individual animals. (Data are plotted as mean ± S.D., *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01; One-way ANOVA followed by multiple comparisons with Bonferroni correction). The VIP-SST disinhibitory circuit has recently been found to be a potent modulator of sensory responses and to regulate cortical states by integrating long-range inputs from other brain regions ( Pi et al., 2013 ;  Fu et al., 2014 ;  Zhang et al., 2014 ). The present study reveals a new function of this disinhibitory circuit in regulating cortical plasticity. Enhancing adult plasticity has long been a topic of great interest on account of its implications for human wellbeing. Inhibitory circuits have been implicated in regulating cortical plasticity. For example, both reducing GABA production and antagonizing GABA A  receptors have been found to enhance adult plasticity in rat visual cortex, possibly by facilitating the potentiation of the input from the open eye ( Harauzov et al., 2010 ). Chronic treatment using the antidepressant drug fluoxetine enhances adult plasticity, accompanied by reduced GABA levels in visual cortex ( Maya Vetencourt et al., 2008 ). Our results are consistent with the idea that reduced inhibition is permissive for enhancing adult plasticity. Removing extracellular perineuronal nets is also reported to enhance adult plasticity in rats ( Pizzorusso et al., 2002 ; but see;  Vorobyov et al., 2013 ). This and other findings suggest that simply destabilizing synaptic connections may enhance cortical plasticity, because reduced GABA transmission de-stabilizes GABAergic synaptic terminals ( Fu et al., 2012 ). Transplanted GABAergic progenitor cells may create another form of instability of inhibitory circuits by making widespread new connections with host neurons and causing a second critical period of plasticity in adult mice ( Southwell et al., 2010 ). Extensive evidence has accumulated indicating that parvalbumin (PV)-positive fast-spiking cells play an important role in cortical plasticity ( Hensch, 2005 ;  Kuhlman et al., 2013 ). Our study reveals that disinhibiting pyramidal neurons by either activating VIP neurons or silencing SST neurons also enhances adult plasticity and allows potentiation of open-eye responses in V1, revealing an important role for at least these other major types of inhibitory neurons in cortical plasticity. Recent findings using transplantation of embryonic inhibitory neurons also support a role for SST neurons in cortical plasticity ( Tang et al., 2014 ). It should be noted that there are multiple classes of SST neurons ( Markram et al., 2004 ;  Hu et al., 2013 ), only some of which are suppressed during locomotion ( Fu et al., 2014 ;  Reimer et al., 2014 ). In the present experiments, TeTx was presumably not selective in silencing the different subgroups of SST neurons. Enhancing serotonin signaling by chronic fluoxetine treatment has also been shown to enhance adult plasticity ( Maya Vetencourt et al., 2008 ). Exposure to an enriched environment was reported to enhance serotonin levels in rat visual cortex as well as to enhance adult plasticity ( Baroncelli et al., 2010 ). Unlike PV and SST neurons, VIP neurons express the 5-HT 3  serotonin receptor, a channel that allows fast depolarization of neurons ( Lee et al., 2010 ). VIP neurons also receive a direct nicotinic cholinergic input from the basal forebrain, which modulates cortical state and sensory responses ( Lee and Dan, 2012 ;  Fu et al., 2014 ). Therefore, the VIP-SST disinhibitory circuit is well poised as a target for manipulation of cortical plasticity by these two neuromodulators. Adult ocular dominance plasticity in V1 consists of a potentiation of the open-eye response following MD; while critical period plasticity features an initial depression of the deprived-eye response followed by potentiation of the response to the open eye ( Sato and Stryker, 2008 ). A number of manipulations in older animals mimic critical period plasticity in their effects on responses to the two eyes: transplantation of embryonic inhibitory neurons ( Southwell et al., 2010 ) or acute suppression of the activity of PV neurons ( Kuhlman et al., 2013 ) in mice, or chronic fluoxetine treatment in rats ( Maya Vetencourt et al., 2008 ). Other manipulations, such as brief dark exposure ( He et al., 2006 ;  Stodieck et al., 2014 ), repeated MD ( Hofer et al., 2006 ), visuomotor experience ( Tschetter et al., 2013 ), or activation of Rho GTPases ( Cerri et al., 2011 ), lead to a potentiation of open-eye responses that resembles normal adult plasticity following more prolonged MD. The present findings reveal that activation of the VIP-SST disinhibitory pathway is both necessary ( Figure 1, 2 ) and sufficient ( Figures 3, 4 ) for cortical plasticity that potentiates visual responses, and that aerobic exercise is neither necessary nor sufficient. Running, on the other hand, produces both potentiation of open eye responses and depression of responses to the closed eye. Running is associated not only with activation of cortical VIP neurons, but also with increases in multiple neuromodulators including serotonin and noradrenalin ( Meeusen and De Meirleir, 1995 ), both of which have been implicated in modulating adult plasticity ( Gu, 2002 ). It is, therefore, not surprising that enhancement of adult plasticity by locomotion is more complex than simply activating VIP-SST disinhibitory circuit, even though silencing VIP transmission abolished the effect of running on enhancing visual response ( Figure 1—figure supplement 1 ) ( Fu et al., 2014 ). More importantly, the present results also suggest that the potentiation of open-eye response and the depression of closed-eye response are separable from each other and are mediated by distinct mechanisms. The difference between the plasticity produced by reducing the activity of PV- ( Kuhlman et al., 2013 ) or SST- ( Figure 4 ) neurons during MD suggests that different inhibitory circuits are engaged in gating distinct aspects of cortical plasticity. PV- and SST-cells innervate different compartments of pyramidal neurons and exert distinct physiological effects ( Markram et al., 2004 ;  Hu et al., 2014 ). For example, inhibitory synapses on dendritic spines ( van Versendaal et al., 2012 ), which are preferentially innervated by SST neurons, are specifically lost during potentiation of the open-eye response in adult plasticity ( Chiu et al., 2013 ). The different responses to reduced inhibition of distinct elements of the cortical circuit may be fundamental to understanding the differences between critical period and adult plasticity. VIP-Cre (stock No. 010908), SST-Cre (stock No. 013044), and C57B/L6 mice were from Jackson Lab. Experiments were performed on adult (age 3-6 months) mice of both sexes. The animals were maintained in the animal facility at University of California, San Francisco (UCSF) and used in accordance with protocol AN098080-02A-G approved by the UCSF Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. Animals were maintained on a 14 hr light/10 hr dark cycle. Experiments were performed during the light phase of the cycle.
The adult brain continues to learn and can recover from injury, but the elements and operation of the neural circuits responsible for this plasticity are not known. In previous work, we have shown that locomotion dramatically enhances neural activity in the visual cortex (V1) of the mouse (Niell and Stryker, 2010), identified the cortical circuit responsible for this enhancement (Fu et al., 2014), and shown that locomotion also dramatically enhances adult plasticity (Kaneko and Stryker, 2014). The circuit that is responsible for enhancing neural activity in the visual cortex contains both vasoactive intestinal peptide (VIP) and somatostatin (SST) neurons (Fu et al., 2014). Here, we ask whether this VIP-SST circuit enhances plasticity directly, independent of locomotion and aerobic activity. Optogenetic activation or genetic blockade of this circuit reveals that it is both necessary and sufficient for rapidly increasing V1 cortical responses following manipulation of visual experience in adult mice. These findings reveal a disinhibitory circuit that regulates adult cortical plasticity.