 Physiological studies have pointed increasingly to a central role played by asynchronous release in mediating synaptic transmission (Goda and Stevens, 1994; Lu and Trussell, 2000; Hefft and Jonas, 2005; Iremonger and Bains, 2007; Best and Regehr, 2009). At most synapses, the asynchronous contribution to release is smaller than the synchronous component, but becomes more prominent with repetitive stimulation (Atluri and Regehr, 1998; Lu and Trussell, 2000; Hefft and Jonas, 2005). Little is known about the functional significance, but the most widely held idea is that it provides persistent transmitter release under conditions where phase locking to the action potential is not required (Atluri and Regehr, 1998; Hefft and Jonas, 2005; Best and Regehr, 2009). At the zebrafish neuromuscular junction (NMJ), asynchronous release may augment release during bouts of prolonged swimming, where release probability may be severely compromised. Paired patch clamp recordings from the caudal primary motor neuron (CaP) and target fast skeletal muscle showed a stereotypic transition from exclusively synchronous to principally asynchronous transmission when stimulated at frequencies greater than 20 Hz (Figure 1A,B; Wen et al., 2010). Behaviorally evoked contractures of zebrafish axial muscle correspond to frequencies between 20 Hz and 100 Hz, so we continue to use the latter stimulus frequency as the benchmark for our studies. At 100 Hz, greater than 95% of the synaptic responses were phase locked to the presynaptic action potential during the first second of stimulation (Figure 1A1,B; Wen et al., 2010). The onset of asynchronous release occurred after the first second of stimulation, displaying a time-dependent increase in overall contribution during the ensuing stimulation (Figure 1A2,B). The release was quantitated as charge transfer by integrating the EPCs for each consecutive second of the stimulation, and synchronous and asynchronous events were separated on the basis of their timing to the action potential (Wen et al., 2010). The release associated with synchronous vs asynchronous events showed a time-dependent transition, and overall each of the two modes accounted for approximately half of the total synaptic transmission (Figure 1B; Wen et al., 2010). The amplitudes of the asynchronous events were indistinguishable from the spontaneous synaptic events measured in the absence of stimulation (Figure 1C), consistent with each representing individual quanta. The synchronous release is strictly dependent on P/Q-type calcium channel function (Figure 1D; Wen et al., 2013). Inhibiting P/Q calcium channels with 1 µM ω-conotoxin GVIA nearly abolished synchronous release (Figure 1D1,E). Unexpectedly, asynchronous release remained intact in the ω-conotoxin GVIA treated fish, but with a greatly delayed onset compared to the control fish (Figure 1D2,E). Quantitatively, over 85% of release seen in ω-conotoxin GVIA fish was associated with the asynchronous mode, and this likely represents an underestimate because of the resolution of our analysis (Figure 1E). Similar to the control, the amplitude of the asynchronous events was indistinguishable from spontaneous miniature events (Figure 1F). The motility mutant line tb204a has greatly compromised P/Q calcium channel function but is not a complete null (Wen et al., 2013). Accordingly, the synchronous release was reduced but not eliminated completely (Figure 1G1), leaving asynchronous release intact (Figure 1G2). Quantitation of the time-dependent contributions showed both reduced synchronous release and delayed onset of asynchronous release for tb204a compared to control (Figure 1H). Once again, the amplitude of the late asynchronous event class was indistinguishable from the spontaneous events measured in the absence of stimulation (Figure 1I), as well as those asynchronous events recorded from control (Figure 1C) and ω-conotoxin GVIA-treated (Figure 1F) fish.10.7554/eLife.01206.003Figure 1.Asynchronous synaptic transmission remains intact in the P/Q calcium channel mutant tb204a and following treatment of wild-type fish with ω-conotoxin GVIA.(A-C) A representative paired recording from untreated wild-type fish. (A) Voltage clamp traces of EPCs in response to 20 s, 100 Hz stimulation of the motor neuron. Expanded views with both action potentials and associated postsynaptic EPCs showing early synchronous (A1) and mixed synchronous and asynchronous release at the peak of release (A2). (B) Quantitation of the time-dependence of synchronous (blue), asynchronous (red) and total (black) synaptic charge integrals determined using the methods described in Wen et al. (2010). (C) Comparison of the stimulus evoked asynchronous event amplitudes recorded during the last 10 s of stimulation (black fill) and spontaneous synaptic current amplitudes (gray fill, 402 events from 17 cells). The distributions are fit by a Gaussian function with means corresponding to 637 pA and 556 pA. (D-F) A representative paired recording from fish treated with 1 µM ω-conotoxin GVIA. (D) Traces of EPCs with expanded views showing near elimination of synchronous release (D1) and intact asynchronous release (D2) in ω-conotoxin GVIA-treated fish. (E) Time course of release for the recording shown in D. (F) Comparison of its asynchronous event amplitude (black fill) and the same spontaneous synaptic current amplitudes used for 1C and 1I (gray fill). Events during the last 5 s of stimulation were included in the analysis. The mean value from a Gaussian fit for ω-conotoxin GVIA-treated fish was 620 pA. (G-I) A representative paired recording from the mutant line tb204a. (G) Traces of action potentials and EPCs from a homozygous tb204a mutant showing greatly reduced synchronous release (G1) and intact late asynchronous release (G2). (H) The time course of release for the recording shown in G. (I) Comparison of its asynchronous event amplitudes (black fill) and the spontaneous synaptic current amplitudes (gray fill). Events during the last 5 s of stimulation were included in the analysis. The mean value from a Gaussian fit for the mutant was 601 pA. Red circles in (A), (D), and (G) mark the peaks of synchronous events. All experiments were performed with 5 mM EGTA in the intracellular solution.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.01206.003 Paired motor neuron/target fast skeletal muscle recordings have shown that repetitive stimulation of the CaP motor neuron results in a transition from purely synchronous to mixed synchronous/asynchronous release after a delay that is dependent on stimulus frequency (Wen et al., 2010). The studies on CNS neurons generally ascribe asynchronous release to persistent calcium resulting from opening of the highly localized presynaptic calcium channels (Goda and Stevens, 1994; Cummings et al., 1996; Atluri and Regehr, 1998; Chen and Regehr, 1999; Lu and Trussell, 2000). At the zebrafish NMJ, this would be the ω-conotoxin GVIA-sensitive P/Q type calcium channel that is essential for synchronous release (Wen et al., 2013). We tested this idea using paired recordings by either eliminating presynaptic calcium entry through blockade with ω-conotoxin GVIA or by means of a mutant line (tb204a) with functionally compromised P/Q type calcium channels (Wen et al., 2013). We found that a greatly delayed asynchronous component was still present under conditions where the synchronous release calcium channel was eliminated. Using calcium indicator dyes we identified a source of calcium for asynchronous release that, under conditions of P/Q type calcium channel inhibition, originated in the axons and branch points and appeared to propagate into the synaptic boutons. The delayed arrival into the distal boutons, sites of synaptic interaction based on α-btx labeling, accounted well for the delayed onset of asynchronous release. Moreover, paired recordings performed along with calcium imaging confirmed the coincidence between the arrival of the calcium signal and the onset of delayed asynchronous synaptic transmission. Zebrafish (Danio rerio) were maintained in accordance with the standards set forth in the International Animal Care and Use Committee. Brian’s wild-type strain and the tb204a mutant line (Wen et al., 2013) were used for all experiments. The electrophysiology and imaging experiments were performed exclusively on larva between the ages of 72-96 hr post-fertilization (hpf). Methodology for mounting and preparing the fish for paired recordings are detailed in the video publication (Wen and Brehm, 2010). The intracellular solution contains (in mM): 115 K-gluconate, 15 KCl, 2 MgCl2, 10 K-HEPES, 4 Mg-ATP, pH 7.2 with 0.5 mM EGTA or 5 mM EGTA as indicated with each experiment. The extracellular solution contains (in mM): 134 NaCl, 2.9 KCl, 1.2 MgCl2, 2.1 CaCl2, 10 glucose, 10 Na-HEPES, pH 7.8.
Asynchronous transmission plays a prominent role at certain synapses but lacks the mechanistic insights of its synchronous counterpart. The current view posits that triggering of asynchronous release during repetitive stimulation involves expansion of the same calcium domains underlying synchronous transmission. In this study, live imaging and paired patch clamp recording at the zebrafish neuromuscular synapse reveal contributions by spatially distinct calcium sources. Synchronous release is tied to calcium entry into synaptic boutons via P/Q type calcium channels, whereas asynchronous release is boosted by a propagating intracellular calcium source initiated at off-synaptic locations in the axon and axonal branch points. This secondary calcium source fully accounts for the persistence following termination of the stimulus and sensitivity to slow calcium buffers reported for asynchronous release. The neuromuscular junction and CNS neurons share these features, raising the possibility that secondary calcium sources are common among synapses with prominent asynchronous release.
Neurons communicate with one another at junctions called synapses. The arrival of an electrical signal known as an action potential at the first (presynaptic) neuron causes calcium ions to flood into the cell. This in turn causes the neuron to release packages of chemicals called neurotransmitters into the synapse. These activate receptors on the second (postsynaptic) neuron, triggering a new action potential that travels down the axon to the next synapse.