 Adult neurogenesis contributes to certain forms of hippocampus-dependent behavior and is associated with a number of neuro-psychiatric diseases (Parent and Murphy, 2008; Deng et al., 2010; Kheirbek et al., 2012; Spalding et al., 2013). Recent data suggested that young ABGCs (around 4 weeks old) contribute to a discrete pattern separation function, whereas older cells (8 weeks or older) are not necessary for this dentate gyrus-dependent function, therefore functionally different pools of granule cells provide unique plasticity to the hippocampal circuits (Clelland et al., 2009; Aimone et al., 2010; Alme et al., 2010; Sahay et al., 2011a; Nakashiba et al., 2012; Neunuebel and Knierim, 2012). Current theories on adult neurogenesis are based on the provisional correlations between the two distinct physiological functions and age-dependent maturation of cellular (including synaptic, biophysical and molecular) properties (Aimone et al., 2006, 2010; Sahay et al., 2011b). This is supported by numerous observations showing that after their birth, ABGCs undergo a continuous maturation process, lasting for 8-10 weeks. ABGCs acquire neuronal properties including synaptic inputs and outputs, and capability of firing action potentials 3 to 4 weeks after their birth. Notably, ABGCs at this cellular age are highly excitable, show enhanced synaptic plasticity and are differently modulated by inhibition compared to ABGCs at the end of the maturation period (Wang et al., 2000; Schmidt-Hieber et al., 2004; Laplagne et al., 2006; Toni et al., 2008; Mongiat et al., 2009; Gu et al., 2012; Marín-Burgin et al., 2012; Vivar et al., 2012; Dieni et al., 2013). However, it remains unknown how two populations emerge by a continuous maturation of the underlying cellular properties of ABGCs. How do individual ABGCs transform from ‘young’ to ‘old’ properties? There are three testable possibilities. First, their functionally important properties may develop continuously (Figure 1A). However, if this is the case, it may contradict the general notion that two distinct ABGC populations exist, and ABGCs would provide a functional continuum. The second possibility is that, as during their early maturation when becoming functionally integrated (<4 weeks), ABGCs switch function according to a predetermined program (Figure 1B). In this situation there are two clearly distinct populations and they would switch within a short temporal window at a predefined stage of their postmitotic life. Third, ABGCs may be susceptible to extrinsic cues allowing for a functional switch for an extended period (Figure 1C). We tested these hypotheses by resolving the integrative properties of individual ABGCs because data-pooling could mask the differences between above hypotheses. Thus, we here analyzed if (i) all cellular properties develop concomitantly, (ii) if there are biophysical properties that allow the emergence of only two populations between 3 and 10 weeks after their birth, and (iii) how and when ABGCs switch function. Using this approach, we show that ABGCs consist of two functionally distinct populations during an extended period, between 3 and 9 weeks of age in rats, by being sensitive to distinct aspects of their inputs.10.7554/eLife.03104.003Figure 1.Potential theoretical modes of postmitotic maturation of functional properties.Each colored line represents the age-dependent change of a theoretical parameter from individual ABGCs. (A) Gradual maturation of the properties results in widely distributed functional continuum. (B) Temporally predefined functional switch. (C) The functional switch occurs in an extended temporal window.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.03104.003 To analyze the cellular maturation of ABGCs, we compared a variety of intrinsic biophysical and input-output transformation properties at seven different age-groups (3-10 weeks after cells are born) of individual birth-dated ABGCs in young adult rats using retroviral labeling (Figure 2, Zhao et al., 2006). The majority of the tested parameters (including input resistance, membrane time constant, whole-cell capacitance, resting membrane potential, action potential threshold, peak dV/dt of the spikes, and maximal firing rate) of individual ABGCs changed continuously with age and, consequently, the distribution of the data points from individual cells was wide, without the emergence of distinguishable populations (Figure 3A-B, statistical values are indicated in the figures—see also Supplementary file 1), reflecting the continuous maturation of these properties in accordance with previous observations (Mongiat et al., 2009; Marín-Burgin et al., 2012).10.7554/eLife.03104.004Figure 2.Maturation of the biophysical and integrative properties of ABGCs.(A) The RFP and biocytin-labeled cells in the dentate gyrus (left panels, d.p.i.: day after virus injection), spiny dendrites (middle panels), and typical mossy fiber terminals in the stratum lucidum of the CA3 region (right) confirm granule cell identity. (B) Four representative RFP-expressing granule cells 34, 47, and 63 days after CAG-RFP virus labeling. The 63-day-old AGBCs were recorded from the same slice. (C) Average subthreshold voltage responses of the example cells to small (−10 pA) current steps. Input resistance (Rin), membrane time constant (τM), and resting membrane potential (RMP) of the cells are indicated. (D) Spike parameters of the example cells at lower current intensities (dV/dt: maximal rate of rise, thr: action potential threshold). (E) Maximal firing rate of the four cells in response to square pulse current injection. (F) Responses of the cells to sinusoidal current injections with increasing amplitude (Δ50 pA) at 10 and 80 Hz. The traces are shown until the firing reached saturation. (G) Number of spikes generated in the example cells as a function of the peak amplitude of the injected sinusoid currents at the all tested frequencies. Gray symbols indicate values that were omitted from the analysis due to lack or saturation of spiking. Offset values describe the minimum input intensities to reach 50% spiking output. (H) Increments of the firing (i.e., the first derivative of the curves in panel F) of the cells. These values were used for the calculation of the average slope (as mean, ASL) and the variance of firing (as variance, VAR). Note that cells 1 and 3 have exceptionally large values at certain input intensity ranges indicating that these cells were more sensitive to certain input intensities. This characteristic is quantified by the large VAR value.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.03104.00410.7554/eLife.03104.005Figure 3.Adult born granule cells (3-10 week old) can be divided into two distinct populations based on cell-to-cell differences in input-output transformation.(A) Left, input resistance of individual ABGCs with various ages (gray crosses). Red and blue circles (S- and L-group members, respectively) highlight the values for the example cells shown in Figure 1. N.L.: not labeled control cells. Right, probability distribution of the data set shows single peak (single Gaussian fit: F = 0.0001). (B) Monotonous probability distribution of membrane time constant, whole cell capacitance, resting membrane potential, maximal rate of rise of spikes, relative offset of the input-output curves, and action potential threshold data from the same set of cells as above. (C) Left, average slope (top) and variance of the slope (bottom) of the same individual ABGCs as above with various ages (gray crosses). Blue lines indicate the lack of correlation between the gain of the input-output functions and the age of individual cells within the S-group (linear fit, ASL: R2 = −0.029, p = 0.89, VAR: R2 = 0.01, p = 0.257). Right, two population emerges from the distribution of the average slope values of individual cells (two peaks Gaussian, ASL: F = 0.0014, VAR: F = 0.0001). The centers of the two clusters and average distance values from the centers (error bars) are shown on the right (K-means analysis, F < 10−9, horizontal gray lines on the left panels indicate the separation by the K-means analysis).DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.03104.005 Here, we show that the gain of the input-output transformation of 3- to 10-weeks-old ABGCs exists at two functionally distinct states, allowing for the translation of similar excitatory drives into highly distinct action potential outputs in a manner that is not directly predicted by the cellular age alone (refer to the alternative maturation hypotheses depicted in Figure 1A-C). This finding is in contrast to the continuous maturation hypothesis (Figure 1A). Around the third postmitotic week, ABGCs represent a functionally homogeneous population (S-group) characterized by highly variable and sensitive output, which potentially underlies the effective disambiguation of input patterns because the output of S-group cells represent certain input ranges with exceptional efficacy. Importantly, this functional parameter is similar for an extended time period at the level of individual ABGCs, despite the continuous maturation of other biophysical parameters suggesting precise homeostatic tuning and complex interactions of the biophysical properties (Marder and Goaillard, 2006). However, between the fifth and ninth week (under our experimental conditions), ABGCs switch function by losing their sensitivity to a particular input strength as their output incrementally reports a wide input range (L-group). Thus, in the theoretical case of identical input strengths and patterns to S- and L-cells (which allowed us to investigate the integrative properties of individual ABGCs in isolation), sensitivity of ABGCs in the S-group to certain input ranges, in opposed to linear reporting in cells of the L-group, allows a certain level of input disambiguation at the level of single granule cells. Furthermore, previously described distinct input rules (Dieni et al., 2013) may synergistically promote two distinct functions within the ABGC populations, if these rules are specifically associated with S- or L-group properties. All experimental procedures were made in accordance with the ethical guidelines of the Institute of Experimental Medicine Protection of Research Subjects Committee (permission: 22.1/1760/003/2009) and were approved by the local virus safety committee.
Adult-born granule cells (ABGCs) are involved in certain forms of hippocampus-dependent learning and memory. It has been proposed that young but functionally integrated ABGCs (4-weeks-old) specifically contribute to pattern separation functions of the dentate gyrus due to their heightened excitability, whereas old ABGCs (>8 weeks old) lose these capabilities. Measuring multiple cellular and integrative characteristics of 3- 10-week-old individual ABGCs, we show that ABGCs consist of two functionally distinguishable populations showing highly distinct input integration properties (one group being highly sensitive to narrow input intensity ranges while the other group linearly reports input strength) that are largely independent of the cellular age and maturation stage, suggesting that ‘classmate’ cells (born during the same period) can contribute to the network with fundamentally different functions. Thus, ABGCs provide two temporally overlapping but functionally distinct neuronal cell populations, adding a novel level of complexity to our understanding of how life-long neurogenesis contributes to adult brain function.
Remembering what happened on different occasions involves a process in the brain called pattern separation, which allows us to separate and distinguish our memories. One part of the brain where pattern separation occurs is called the dentate gyrus, which sits in the hippocampus—the brain region that is in charge of certain forms of learning and memory.