 While many visual brain areas contain representations of the current eye position, the nature and the role of this eye position signal (EPS) are still unclear. This is surprising because the EPS is essential for our ability to perceive and interact with the world around us. For instance, the EPS combined with the visual input falling on the retina allows us to perceive the world as stable even though we move our eyes ( Helmholtz, 1867 ). The EPS also plays a role in accurate visually guided movements ( Zipser and Andersen, 1988 ;  Salinas and Abbott, 1996 ;  Pouget et al., 2002 ) and motor learning ( Lewis et al., 1994 ). The lateral intraparietal area (LIP) is one of the areas representing the EPS ( Andersen et al., 1985 ;  Andersen et al., 1987 ;  Gnadt and Andersen, 1988 ;  Andersen et al., 1990 ;  Schall and Thompson, 1999 ;  Goldberg et al., 2002 ). However recent studies have reported that the EPS is too slow to support the functions of spatial stability and coordinate transformations ( Xu et al., 2012 ), or is inaccurate around the time of saccadic eye movement ( Morris et al., 2012 ;  Morris et al., 2013 ). Here we show that when quantified across neuronal populations and a wide range of oculomotor behaviors, the EPS in LIP is accurate before, during, and after eye movements. Contrary to previous reports, the dynamics of the EPS are consistent with LIP supporting the aforementioned sensorimotor functions. Task and decoding mechanisms. (A) Scheme of the task and the three oculomotor behaviors. (B) Predicting saccade direction from the population activity in LIP. The population activity of 325 neurons (red and blue curves, bottom panel) during the memory epoch was computed at the preferred eye position (derived from the fixation epoch) for two planned saccade directions (180 and 270 deg, dotted lines, bottom panel), and yielded the prediction (red and blue curves, top panel). The responses of a single neuron (red and blue dots, bottom panel) yielded the dotted probability distributions (top panel). To illustrate the mechanisms of predicting oculomotor behaviors from neuronal populations, we computed the population activity in the memory epoch for two planned saccade directions (135 and 270 deg) starting at the preferred eye position (red and blue curves, bottom panel,  Figure 1B ). The population response for each saccade direction was bell-shaped and centered on the neurons that most vigorously responded for the planned saccade. We subsequently inferred the planned saccade direction based solely on these two population activities by computing the probability of a saccade direction given the observed population response (solid lines, red for 135 deg and blue for 270 deg, top panel,  Figure 1B ). Each population activity perfectly predicted (i.e., with a probability of 1) the planned saccade direction underlying it. We then asked how well saccade directions could be predicted using only one neuron instead of the entire population: the dots in bottom panel represent the responses of this neuron to the two saccade directions, and the dotted lines in the top panel show the corresponding prediction probabilities. We found that while one planned saccade direction could be well, albeit not perfectly, predicted (270 deg, blue dotted line), the other direction (135 deg, red dotted line) could not be predicted (almost uniform distribution). Predictions based on the population activity, however, were informative across all saccade directions, and could thus potentially reveal properties that were hidden at the level of single neurons. The importance of a population representation for inference is further reinforced in LIP because it contains an abundance of simultaneously expressed signals, for example eye position and saccade direction. Surprisingly, LIP has to our knowledge not yet been studied at the population level using simultaneous neuronal recordings or an exhaustive sampling of saccade directions and eye positions. NPC across the task for one population and as function of the number of neurons. (A–C) Time course of the NPC for a population of 20 independently recorded neurons for the three oculomotor behaviors. The dark curves are the decoding accuracies (mean plus-minus SEM across trials) with spike times aligned to the target onset (left column) and saccade onset (right column). The horizontal dotted lines represent chance levels (1/8, 1/9 and 1/25 respectively). The shaded gray areas (mean plus-minus SD) represent the different task events: fixation on, fixation acquired, target off (left column) and fixation off, fixation I acquired, fixation II acquired (right column). (D) NPC for each of the three oculomotor behaviors during different task epochs as function of the number of neurons ordered by increasing importance for the NPC (mean plus-minus SEM). The neurons composing the population in  Figure 2A–C  were not empirical samples collected simultaneously: they were a collection of the 20 independently recorded neurons that were most relevant for the NPC (‘Materials and methods’). The NPC increased dramatically for small populations of such ‘optimized’ neurons and subsequently flattened out ( Figure 2D ). This result suggests that the NPC in LIP is sparse: a few carefully selected neurons do nearly as well as many more, and 20 neurons represent a good tradeoff between population size and prediction accuracy. Time course of the NPC. (A–C) Time course of the NPC for 51 empirical samples of simultaneously recorded neurons for the three oculomotor behaviors. The images (bottom panels) represent the NPC with spike times aligned to the target onset (left column) and saccade onset (right column). Each horizontal slice represents the NPC of one population. The dark curves in the upper panels are the time courses of the NPCs averaged across populations (mean plus-minus SD), and the red curves the sampling-corrected NPCs using the same conventions as in Figure 2.(D) Accuracy of the NPC for each behavior in each task epoch. The black curves are the accuracies averaged across empirical populations of simultaneously recorded neurons (mean plus-minus SEM), and the red curves are the sampling corrected empirical populations (mean plus-minus SEM), and the gray curves are the accuracies of the population of 20 ‘optimized’ neurons (mean plus-minus SEM, the dots indicating the epochs used in Figure 2D). We have shown that the EPS is accurately carried by populations of LIP neurons before, during and after an eye movement. We next investigated the dynamics of this signal, and asked whether they were consistent with the three hypothesized functions of the EPS. We computed the onsets and peaks of the time course of the NPC (‘Materials and methods’) of empirical populations of simultaneously recorded neurons, and found that the three oculomotor signals drastically differed in their temporal signatures. Dynamics of the NPC. (A–C) Timing of the onsets (black dots) and peaks (red dots) of the NPC across empirical populations of simultaneously recorded neurons for the three oculomotor behaviors (times spread out along abscissa for visualization). The EPS of the presaccade current eye position appeared before the initial fixation was acquired ( Figure 4B ), suggesting a corollary discharge predicting the future position of the eye in the presence of a visual input. This EPS transitioned from current to past state with a temporal delay in the absence of visual input and peaked well after the saccade ( Figure 4B ). The NPC of the presaccade eye position close to the saccade did not allow us to trace its origins because it occurred long after the presaccade eye position was acquired. The EPS of the postsaccade eye position, computed using the current eye position and the saccade direction signals, was first strongly revealed right after the target onset with timing consistent with the NPC of the saccade direction signal ( Figure 4C ). The NPC of the postsaccade eye position strongly increased around the saccade onset, thus transitioning from a predictive to a current state. In some cases the signal rose before, and some cases after the saccade. These findings suggest that the EPS at the saccade onset has corollary discharge and proprioceptive components respectively. This result contrasts with the presaccade signal that began before the fixation was acquired ( Figure 4B ). We hypothesize that this difference is due to the multiplicative effect (gain field) of a visual inputs (fixation light) and eye position that may lower the threshold for cell activity, thus producing an earlier expression of the presaccade eye position signal. The peak of the NPC occurred after the saccade, consistent with a proprioceptive contribution. Contrary to recent findings ( Xu et al., 2012 ), our results show that the EPS was fast enough to represent eye position, in fact being very prospective, and that gain fields are updated almost instantly. The results of this study show that the EPS is accurate throughout the course of an eye movement even long before and long after the saccade and has rapid transients that allow it to accurately reflect oculomotor behaviors. These findings favor the three hypothesized roles of the EPS. First, visual perceptual stability requires an EPS that is fast, as corroborated by our findings. We however also found that the EPS, at least in LIP, does not reflect visual mislocalization around the saccade (the accuracy of the NPC does not decrease around the saccade), thus suggesting that this might take place in another visual-motor area. Second, we found that the EPS can have a central function for coordinate transformations because the EPS was fast and present immediately before and after the eye movement. The EPS is ideally suited for state estimation because it is composed of sensory feedback (proprioception) and forward model (corollary discharge) signals. It can thus give the best estimate of the current state of the eye and is also consistent with the ‘remapping’ seen across eye movements ( Duhamel et al., 1992 ;  Vaziri et al., 2006 ). Third, we showed that the EPS could be used as a calibration signal for learning and adapting eye movements because it occurred immediately after the saccade and was maintained for a long period of time. Our findings show that the timing of information of the EPS is consistent with the hypothesized roles of LIP in visual-motor behaviors ( Andersen et al., 1985 ). These results strengthen further the central role of LIP for oculomotor behaviors despite also having high-level cognitive functions ( Duhamel et al., 1992 ;  Shadlen and Newsome, 1996 ;  Snyder et al., 1997 ;  Platt and Glimcher, 1999 ;  Andersen and Buneo, 2002 ;  Corbetta and Shulman, 2002 ;  Bisley and Goldberg, 2003 ;  Freedman and Assad, 2006 ). Moreover, the findings provide a better understanding of the fundamental concepts of how information is processed in the cerebral cortex at the level of populations of neurons. The study of the NPC can guide the development of brain-controlled neural prosthetics that can assist paralyzed patients with limb and oculomotor paralysis resulting from traumatic accidents, peripheral neuropathies, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, multiple sclerosis, and stroke. The animals performed delayed memory saccades on a Cartesian grid whose nodes were spaced by 8 deg. The animals maintained fixation for 1000 ms at one randomly chosen location on the 3 × 3 grid. Next a target was flashed for 300 ms in one location randomly chosen from the eight neighboring locations, and the animals were required to maintain fixation during this epoch. The animals had to remember the target location for 1300 ms plus-minus 200 ms (drawn from a uniform distribution). Upon extinction of the fixation, they made a saccade to the remembered target location in complete darkness, thus acquiring a postsaccade fixation on a 5 × 5 grid. They maintained fixation there for 500 ms (fixation I) in the absence of visual input. A fixation light was subsequently turned on at the target location for another 500 ms, possibly triggering a small corrective saccade. Upon completion of this second fixation (fixation II), the stimulus was removed and the animals were rewarded by a drop of water. We only considered correct trials. The animals completed ∼11 random blocks, for a total of ∼11 × ((3 × 3) × 8) = 792 saccades. The eye position was tracked by an infrared camera, and the signal was sampled at 2 kHz (EyeLink, SR Research, Ontario, Canada). All behavioral variables were instructed and monitored in real-time (LabView, National Instruments, Austin, TX, USA).
Understanding how the brain computes eye position is essential to unraveling high-level visual functions such as eye movement planning, coordinate transformations and stability of spatial awareness. The lateral intraparietal area (LIP) is essential for this process. However, despite decades of research, its contribution to the eye position signal remains controversial. LIP neurons have recently been reported to inaccurately represent eye position during a saccadic eye movement, and to be too slow to support a role in high-level visual functions. We addressed this issue by predicting eye position and saccade direction from the responses of populations of LIP neurons. We found that both signals were accurately predicted before, during and after a saccade. Also, the dynamics of these signals support their contribution to visual functions. These findings provide a principled understanding of the coding of information in populations of neurons within an important node of the cortical network for visual-motor behaviors.
Whenever we reach towards an object, we automatically use visual information to guide our movements and make any adjustments required. Visual feedback helps us to learn new motor skills, and ensures that our physical view of the world remains stable despite the fact that every eye movement causes the image on the retina to shift dramatically. However, such visual feedback is only useful because it can be compared with information on the position of the eyes, which is stored by the brain at all times.