 The formation of sensory percepts in the mammalian cortex is thought to involve the propagation of action potentials through populations of connected neurons in response to sensory stimulation (Hebb, 1949; Harris, 2005). Rules that dictate changes in the strength, or efficacy, of these connections rely on persistent correlated activity between the connected neurons (for recent review, see Abraham, 2008). For these changes in synaptic efficacy to be functional and recognized by the down-stream neurons targeted by the axon, the changes need to influence AP patterns. Plasticity induction involving precisely timed action-potentials, known as spike-timing-dependent plasticity (Markram et al., 1997; Bi and Poo, 1998), has been suggested as a candidate mechanism to determine which stimulus driven inputs are strengthened and weakened (out of the many possible sensory driven inputs). What makes STDP rules so appealing for modification of synaptic strength in the cortex is that the low numbers of APs and low repetition frequencies used to induce plastic changes in STDP protocols (Feldman, 2012) are consistent with low AP firing rates observed in awake freely moving animals exploring a novel environment (Lee et al., 2006; Sawinski et al., 2009). In addition, cortical neurons are capable of AP-responses that are temporally precise over multiple trials (Bair and Koch, 1996; Marsalek et al., 1997; Tchumatchenko et al., 2011), similar to the precision typically used during STDP pairing protocols (for recent review see, Feldman, 2012). Lastly, most modeling studies of synaptic plasticity using STDP rules assume that synaptic modification leads to changes in spiking (Gerstner et al., 1996; Song and Abbott, 2001) with a recent study suggesting that STDP underlies sensory map plasticity in the young and adult cortex (Young et al., 2007). However, evidence for single-neuron STDP in vivo remains scarce and confined to subthreshold changes (Meliza and Dan, 2006; Jacob et al., 2007) and remains controversial (Lisman and Spruston, 2005, 2010; Fregnac et al., 2010; Shouval et al., 2010). While extracellular studies have suggested STDP can modify spiking patterns in anesthetized (Fu et al., 2002) and freely moving animals (Celikel et al., 2004), this evidence remains difficult to interpret without information on single-cell membrane potential dynamics. We addressed these questions by pairing precisely timed postsynaptic spikes to presynaptic inputs arising from visual stimulation. We used STDP protocols similar to those previously applied in vivo (Meliza and Dan, 2006), but with the difference that all ongoing membrane potential voltage fluctuations and spiking at the cell soma were measured and taken into account when presenting the stimulus, since large membrane potential fluctuations (Cowan and Wilson, 1994) can alter a neuron's spiking responses (Petersen et al., 2003; Sachdev et al., 2004) and ongoing spiking may influence plasticity outcome (Sjostrom et al., 2001). We targeted whole-cell recordings (Margrie et al., 2003) to Layer 2/3 (L2/3) neurons in the binocular primary visual cortex (n = 58 rats) using intrinsic imaging followed by two-photon microscopy as using stereotaxic coordinates alone can be inaccurate (Slotnick and Brown, 1980; Kline and Reid, 1984). All neurons (n = 71, yielding 72 data points, see ‘Materials and methods’) were identified as L2/3 pyramidal neurons, based on firing pattern, location below the pia and morphology after post hoc histological staining. For visual stimulation, a bar was flashed (500 ms) (Figure 1A) every 3-4 s at one of four non-overlapping spatial positions (Figure 1B). To measure ongoing spiking and membrane potential fluctuations, and to reduce variance and maximize consistency in the evoked responses (Petersen et al., 2003; Sachdev et al., 2004), we recorded in current clamp mode and always presented stimuli after the membrane potential had transitioned from an up-state into a down-state (Figure 1C), during which far fewer spontaneous synaptic inputs occur (Waters and Helmchen 2006).10.7554/eLife.00012.003Figure 1.Down-state triggering of visual stimuli and timing of evoked responses and spikes during the STDP protocol.(A) Flashed vertical bars were presented to an anesthetized rat from a stimulus screen. (B) Continuous whole-cell current-clamp recording with down-state triggered visual stimulus presentations (grey boxes) and hyperpolarizing step currents (−100 pA) to estimate input resistance. Flashed vertical bars were presented in one of four different positions across the stimulus screen. (C) Detailed view of whole-cell current-clamp recording of a voltage response (magenta, green arrow marks initial peak) to a 500 ms (grey box) flashed bar presented only during down-states (period marked in blue, dashed line indicates threshold used for online down-state detection). (D) Average membrane potential responses (green arrows indicate initial response peaks) to flashed bar stimulus for five different neurons. (E) Pairing consisted of injecting depolarizing current into the postsynaptic neuron to elicit a single AP timed to occur either before (left, ‘−Timing’) or after (right, ‘+Timing’) the response peak (green arrow). (F) Scatter plot showing timing of evoked APs for each recording vs timing of initial response peak (n = 32). Time 0 denotes stimulus onset. Histograms show the number of neurons with positive timing and negative timing.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.00012.003 Our results demonstrate that an STDP protocol using less than 50 paired APs can convert a neuron's visually evoked responses from non-spiking to spiking, can increase and diminish existing spiking responses, and can induce a rearrangement of the neurons sub- and suprathreshold responses to stimuli presented at locations surrounding the paired location. Our current findings extend our knowledge about STDP-induced subthreshold changes in vivo (Meliza and Dan, 2006; Jacob et al., 2007) to the suprathreshold domain. Our study also provides a bridge between the changes in spiking observed across many neurons' receptives fields after alteration of sensory input for example through retinal lesions (Wiesel and Hubel, 1963; Kaas et al., 1990; Gilbert and Wiesel, 1992) and subtle changes in subthreshold responses induced by STDP at the single neuron level both in vitro (Magee and Johnston, 1997; Markram et al., 1997; Bi and Poo, 1998) and in vivo (Meliza and Dan, 2006; Jacob et al., 2007). Such a connection between receptive field plasticity, rearrangement of a neuron's tuning properties and STDP has been suggested by theoretical studies (Song and Abbott, 2001; Young et al., 2007), but to date has not been shown experimentally. As the rates of AP activity used in the pairing protocols was similar to activity reported for upper cortical layer populations in the visual cortex of both headfixed awake (Greenberg et al., 2008) and freely exploring rodents (Sawinski et al., 2009), this form of plasticity could represent a more general plasticity principle that relies on low firing rates and is central to individual neurons joining or leaving cell-assemblies, as proposed by Donald Hebb (Hebb, 1949). All experimental procedures were performed according to the animal welfare guidelines of the Max Planck Society. Male Lister Hooded rats at postnatal day 23-28 were anesthetized with urethane (1.6-2 g/kg body weight, i.p.). Supplementary doses of urethane (10% of original dose) were administered as required to maintain anesthetic depth at a level where paw withdrawal and corneal reflexes were absent. The general anesthesia depth during all recordings were identified as stage III-3 based on lack of whisker movement and tail response, and the frequency spectrum of electrocorticogram (ECG) signals (Kubicki and Rieger, 1968; Friedberg et al., 1999). Body temperature was monitored throughout the experiment with a thermal probe and maintained at 37°C. The animal skull was exposed and cleaned and a metal plate was attached with dental acrylic cement. A craniotomy and a dural opening were made above the left cortex (2.5 mm anterior lambda, 4.2 mm lateral from the midline). The exposed cortex was superfused with Normal Rat Ringer's (NRR) solution (in mM): 135 NaCl, 5.4 KCl, 5 HEPES, 1 MgCl2 and 1.8 CaCl2 (pH 7.2) (Kerr et al., 2005). Astrocytes were labeled with sulforhodamine 101 (Nimmerjahn et al., 2004). The craniotomy was filled with agarose (type III-A, 1% in NRR) and covered with an immobilized glass coverslip.
Action Potential (APs) patterns of sensory cortex neurons encode a variety of stimulus features, but how can a neuron change the feature to which it responds? Here, we show that in vivo a spike-timing-dependent plasticity (STDP) protocol—consisting of pairing a postsynaptic AP with visually driven presynaptic inputs—modifies a neurons' AP-response in a bidirectional way that depends on the relative AP-timing during pairing. Whereas postsynaptic APs repeatedly following presynaptic activation can convert subthreshold into suprathreshold responses, APs repeatedly preceding presynaptic activation reduce AP responses to visual stimulation. These changes were paralleled by restructuring of the neurons response to surround stimulus locations and membrane-potential time-course. Computational simulations could reproduce the observed subthreshold voltage changes only when presynaptic temporal jitter was included. Together this shows that STDP rules can modify output patterns of sensory neurons and the timing of single-APs plays a crucial role in sensory coding and plasticity.
Nerve cells, called neurons, are one of the core components of the brain and form complex networks by connecting to other neurons via long, thin ‘wire-like’ processes called axons. Axons can extend across the brain, enabling neurons to form connections—or synapses—with thousands of others. It is through these complex networks that incoming information from sensory organs, such as the eye, is propagated through the brain and encoded.