 Sleep is a common and prominent behavior in almost all vertebrate animals and also in most invertebrates (Cirelli, 2009; Sehgal and Mignot, 2011). The function of sleep is a mystery, but it is surely of great importance to animals, as prolonged sleep deprivation can lead to death. Anatomical studies in mammals and birds have revealed brain structures and neurotransmitters that regulate sleep and wakefulness (Saper et al., 2010). However, our understanding of the molecular mechanisms that drive the need to sleep is still in its infancy, partially due to the challenge of performing genetic experiments with mammalian models. In the past decade, several premier genetic organisms have been introduced into the sleep field, including fruit flies, worms and zebra fish. Mammalian counterparts of some sleep components identified in these model animals also regulate sleep (Joho et al., 2006), which argues that (i) behavioral genetics in lower organisms provides an efficient tool to identify sleep components, (ii) at least some of the mechanisms underlying sleep are conserved through evolution. As previous screens have identified sleep components on the X chromosome and the second chromosome (Cirelli et al., 2005; Koh et al., 2008; Stavropoulos and Young, 2011), we sought to identify sleep-altering mutations on the third chromosome in Drosophila. To this end, we generated a stock of iso31 (Ryder et al., 2004) flies carrying a newly isogenized third chromosome and treated males of this stock with 10-25 mM ethyl-methanesulfonate (EMS). Individual male progeny were bred to achieve homozygosity of the third chromosome, and females of the F3 generation were tested for daily sleep patterns in the presence of light:dark cycles (Koh et al., 2008). As seen in previous screens (Koh et al., 2008), sleep amounts were normally distributed in the 1857 lines assayed (Figure 1A, Figure 1—source data 1). Two homozygous mutant lines showed a severe reduction of sleep length, and we focused on one of these that we named redeye (rye). rye homozygotes show a >50% reduction in both daytime and night-time sleep (Figure 1C). The activity (average number of beam crossings during periods of activity) of rye mutants is comparable with that of wild type controls, suggesting it is not a hyperactive mutant (Figure 1B). rye heterozygotes have slightly less sleep than wild type, suggesting that the rye mutation is partially dominant (Figure 1B,C). The dramatic reduction of baseline sleep results largely from a shortening of the average sleep episode duration (Figure 1D), which is indicative of a defect in sleep maintenance. The average number of sleep episodes at night is actually increased significantly in rye mutants, perhaps because the sleep homeostat senses sleep loss and compensates by initiating more bouts. We also assayed rye mutants in sleep deprivation assays and found that they did not lose much additional sleep in response to mechanical stimulation (data not shown). We surmise that an inability to sustain sleep bouts leads to the buildup of high sleep need in rye mutants, which makes them resist any further sleep loss.10.7554/eLife.01473.003Figure 1.Identification of a short sleep mutant, redeye (rye), through a chemical mutagenesis (EMS) screen.(A) Histogram depicting average sleep levels in females from homozygous EMS-mutagenized lines (n = 1857). The mean sleep value for each mutant was calculated by assaying sleep in 4-8 individual flies in the presence of 12 hr L-12 hr D cycles. Average sleep for all lines is indicated on the X axis in increments of 25 min. The Y axis depicts the number of mutant lines within each group. The dashed lines mark the sleep values that correspond to plus/minus 3× standard deviation of the mean. The arrowhead indicates the redeye mutant. (B) Top: average activity pattern of females from control lines and from rye mutants recorded in 12hr L-D cycles (n = 14-16 in 5 days). Bottom: sleep profiles with standard error bars. Black: lines isogenized on the 3rd chromosome for chemical mutagenesis; Blue: flies heterozygous for rye and the isogenized control chromosome; Orange: rye homozygotes. (C) Mean values of total sleep, daytime sleep and night-time sleep for rye mutants (Figure 1—source data 1). For each genotype 14-16 flies were assayed over a 5 day period. Bars represent standard error. One-way ANOVA was performed followed by Tukey post hoc analysis. * represents p<0.05, **p<0.01 and ***p<0.001. (D) Sleep quality of rye mutants: Daytime and night-time sleep episode length and episode number are plotted in the box-and-whisker diagram (Figure 1—source data 1). The middle line represents the median value; Bottom and top line of each box represent 25% and 75% respectively; Bottom bar and top bar represent 5% and 95% respectively. ns: not significant, ***p<0.001.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.01473.00310.7554/eLife.01473.004Figure 1—Source data 1.Measurement of sleep duration for all EMS mutants and sleep analysis of rye mutants.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.01473.004 The molecular mechanism of sleep homeostasis is a mystery and a subject of intense research in the sleep field (Suzuki et al., 2013). In addition to the investigation of mechanisms underlying sleep drive, considerable effort is being put into identifying biomarkers of sleep need. Based on what we know about the so-called sleep homeostat, which consists of increasing sleep pressure during wakefulness and dissipation of such pressure following sleep, we suggest that a component or direct output of the homeostat should satisfy three criteria: (i) the gene product should regulate the sleep:wake cycle (i.e., genetic alleles of this gene should have some sleep phenotype); (ii) expression levels or activity of the gene product should go up during wakefulness or during sleep deprivation and (iii) expression levels or activity should decrease after sleep. The function of RYE and the molecular kinetics of the RYE protein largely satisfy these criteria. However, while RYE builds up during sleep deprivation, it does not accumulate gradually over the wake period in a daily cycle. Rather, it displays a marked increase close to the time of sleep onset, suggesting that it is not a central component of the homeostat, but responds to an upstream homeostatic signal, perhaps when that signal reaches a certain threshold. The fact that over-expression of RYE does not promote sleep also supports the idea that it is not the sleep-inducing homeostatic signal (further discussed below). Nevertheless, RYE is not simply a sleep output gene or sleep biomarker. It is required for implementation of signals from the homeostat and it functions to maintain sleep. Thus, we propose that rye is a sleep-regulating gene immediately downstream of the homeostat. Wild type iso31 (Ryder et al., 2004) was crossed with TM2/TM6C, Sb (Bloomington stock #5906), and a single male progeny was selected and crossed with #5906 to balance the 3rd chromosome and generate a line isogenic for this chromosome.
In this study, we report a new protein involved in the homeostatic regulation of sleep in Drosophila. We conducted a forward genetic screen of chemically mutagenized flies to identify short-sleeping mutants and found one, redeye (rye) that shows a severe reduction of sleep length. Cloning of rye reveals that it encodes a nicotinic acetylcholine receptor α subunit required for Drosophila sleep. Levels of RYE oscillate in light-dark cycles and peak at times of daily sleep. Cycling of RYE is independent of a functional circadian clock, but rather depends upon the sleep homeostat, as protein levels are up-regulated in short-sleeping mutants and also in wild type animals following sleep deprivation. We propose that the homeostatic drive to sleep increases levels of RYE, which responds to this drive by promoting sleep.
Almost all animals need to sleep, including most insects. In experiments in the 1980s, a group of rats that were completely deprived of sleep died within only a few weeks. Sleep has been implicated in processes including tissue repair, memory consolidation and, more recently, the removal of waste materials from the brain. However, a full understanding of why we sleep is still lacking.