 Visual contrast is usually referred to as the difference in brightness between an object and the background (Hofstetter et al., 2000). Classical vision research experiments systematically investigated how visual contrast affects objects motion perception (Thompson, 1982; Stone and Thompson, 1992; Blakemore and Snowden, 1999; Anstis, 2003). These studies have shown that the perceived speed of two-dimensional moving objects—for example, plaid patterns on a computer screen—is underestimated when visual contrast is reduced. More recent studies based on driving scenarios have suggested that the underestimation of visual speed at low contrast applies also to perceived self-motion in three-dimensional environments (Snowden et al., 1998; Horswill and Plooy, 2008; Owens et al., 2010). This finding was proposed—and is still considered—as a possible explanation for excessive driving speed in fog. In the first experiment, we used a standard psychophysical procedure to test how contrast affects perceived visual speed. Twelve experienced drivers were presented with pairs of driving scenes and instructed to estimate which scene moved faster (Figure 1A). One of the scenes (reference) had clear visibility and moved at one of three target speeds (40, 60, or 90 km/hr). The other scene (test) had either clear or reduced visibility, and its speed was adjusted for each trial using a Bayesian adaptive method (Kontsevich and Tyler, 1999). This method allowed us to determine the point of subjective equality (PSE) as well as the just-noticeable difference (JND). The PSE corresponded to the speed at which the two scenes were perceived as moving equally fast. Therefore, PSEs higher than the actual speed of the reference scene indicated speed underestimation, whereas PSEs lower than the speed of the reference scene indicated speed overestimation. The JND corresponded to the smallest detectable difference between two different speeds. High JNDs indicated low discrimination sensitivity, whereas low JNDs indicated high discrimination sensitivity.10.7554/eLife.00031.003Figure 1.Experimental design and time course of trials.(A) Experiments 1 and 3: for each trial, the first scene was presented for 700 ms, which included a 100-ms fade-in phase at the beginning and a 100-ms fade-out phase at the end. The second scene was presented 300 ms after the end of the first scene and had the same temporal structure as the first one. Participants had to fixate a central cross for the whole duration of the trial. The order of presentation of the reference and test scene was randomized. (B) Experiments 2 and 4: three driving sessions (i.e., one per target speed) were performed in random order for experiment 2, and one session for experiment 4. Before each test session, the drivers performed a training phase in which a numerical feedback indicated the driving speed when it did not match the target speed (white digits at the bottom of the screen, left panel). In each training phase, the drivers had to drive a total of 5 min at target speed. In addition, at the beginning of each test trial, the scene was shown for 7 s moving at target speed with clear visibility (memory refresher).DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.00031.003 Previous studies suggested that the speed of visual motion in depth is underestimated when the global level of contrast is reduced (Snowden et al., 1998; Horswill and Plooy, 2008; Owens et al., 2010). These studies were directly inspired by classical vision research experiments that assessed the effect of contrast on the perceived speed of two-dimensional objects on a monitor (Thompson, 1982; Stone and Thompson, 1992; Blakemore and Snowden, 1999; Anstis, 2003). In the present study, we reproduced this perceptual bias, showing that visual speed is indeed underestimated when contrast is reduced in a distance-independent manner. However, we show that this is only part of the whole picture. In particular, we demonstrate here for the first time that an identical global loss of visibility can evoke opposite percepts, depending on the nature of the underlying visual contrast reduction. Therefore, contrarily to what has been consistently reported in previous studies, a global contrast reduction can also lead to an overestimation of visual speed. This is notably the case when contrast is not reduced uniformly for all objects of the visual scene but varies according to their distance from the viewer. For instance, in fog, contrast reduction is more important for distant than for close objects. This generates a distance-dependent visibility gradient between the peripheral and central area of the visual field. Our results show that in this situation, perceived speed is not determined by the global level of contrast per se, but rather by the spatial distribution of contrast over the visual scene. More specifically, perceived speed is determined by the relative contrast between the central and peripheral areas of the visual field. When visibility is better in the peripheral than in the central visual field, as is the case in fog, speed is overestimated. Inverting the direction of the contrast gradient with anti-fog and thereby obscuring more the peripheral than the central region of the visual field, inverts the perceptual bias such that speed is now underestimated. This highlights the critical role of the visibility gradient in perceived speed, explaining why speed is unexpectedly overestimated in fog despite a global reduction of visibility. Importantly, our results also evidence the direct relationship between perceived and produced speed. Specifically, speed overestimation systematically prompted drivers to drive slower, whereas speed underestimation led to faster driving paces. This demonstrates that driving speed is strongly affected by perceived visual speed. Thirty-two experienced drivers (23 males and 9 females; aged 21-35 years, mean = 25.3 years) participated voluntarily in the study (12 in experiment 1, 10 in experiment 2, and 10 in experiments 3 and 4). All had normal or corrected-to-normal vision. They were paid, naive as to the purpose of the research, and gave their informed consent before taking part in the experiment. The study was performed in accordance with the ethical standards laid down in the 1964 Declaration of Helsinki, in line with Max Planck Society policy and in compliance with all relevant German legislation. The participants had the option to withdraw from the study at any time without penalty and without having to give a reason.
Visual speed is believed to be underestimated at low contrast, which has been proposed as an explanation of excessive driving speed in fog. Combining psychophysics measurements and driving simulation, we confirm that speed is underestimated when contrast is reduced uniformly for all objects of the visual scene independently of their distance from the viewer. However, we show that when contrast is reduced more for distant objects, as is the case in real fog, visual speed is actually overestimated, prompting drivers to decelerate. Using an artificial anti-fog—that is, fog characterized by better visibility for distant than for close objects, we demonstrate for the first time that perceived speed depends on the spatial distribution of contrast over the visual scene rather than the global level of contrast per se. Our results cast new light on how reduced visibility conditions affect perceived speed, providing important insight into the human visual system.
The ways people respond to conditions of reduced visibility is a central topic in vision research. Notably, it has been shown that people tend to underestimate speeds when visibility is reduced equally at all distances, as for example, when driving with a fogged up windshield. But what happens when the visibility decreases as you look further into the distance, as happens when driving in fog? Fortunately, as new research reveals, people tend to overestimate their speed when driving in fog-like conditions, and show a natural tendency to drive at a slower pace.