 High psychological stress inhibits reproductive function when both occur concomitantly (Rivier and Rivest, 1991; Ferin, 1999; Tilbrook et al., 2000; Louis et al., 2011). From an evolutionary perspective, inhibition of reproductive function by acute stress may be adaptive, delaying reproduction in times of duress or resource scarcity (Wasser and Barash, 1983; Louis et al., 2011). Chronic stress, however can result in persistent, maladaptive sexual dysfunction and suppressed fertility (Young et al., 2006). Little is understood about the lasting effects of stress exposure. For example, after its cessation, can a prior, persistent stressor have long-term negative after-effects on reproductive health? In humans, a high-stress environment may be a significant barrier to sexual well-being and childbearing. In healthy couples under 30 years of age, 63-80% are unable to conceive within 3 months of attempting, and within 1 year of attempting pregnancy, 15% of couples remain unable to conceive (Practice Committee of the American Society for Reproductive Medicine in collaboration with the Society for Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility, 2008). A molecular framework to understand the long-term effects of stress on female reproduction, and its implications for human health, is currently lacking. In sum, we found that chronic stress led to elevated RFRP3 at all stages of the ovulatory cycle. This elevated level of expression persisted after a full cycle of recovery from stress, indicating that the impact of stress on RFRP3 lasts well beyond removal of the stressor. Stressed females exhibited fewer successful copulation events, fewer pregnancies in those that did successfully mate, and increased frequency of embryo resorption in the achieved pregnancies. These marked effects of stress on fertility were completely blocked by knockdown of RFRP3, even though RFRP3 function was restored following stress cessation. These findings indicate that stress has lingering negative consequences for female reproductive function that are mediated by a transient rise in RFRP3. In humans, high anxiety and psychological stress can lead to long-term impaired fertility, ranging from reduced libido, delayed pregnancy success to the extreme of complete reproductive axis suppression as in the case of hypothalamic amenorrhea (Ferin, 1999). In our studies, selective knock-down of hypothalamic RFRP3 during stress exposure preserved all aspects of reproductive function that were otherwise reduced in stress-exposed animals (summary schematic, Figure 4). The stress-induced spike in RFRP3 initiates a long-lasting suppression of reproduction, well after the removal of the stressor, perhaps via positive feedback that maintains elevated RFRP3 levels or engages downstream suppressive targets. These findings reveal a single molecular target that persistently underlies a range of different reproductive dysfunctions that may provide a novel translational framework for clinical study of human reproductive health.10.7554/eLife.04316.007Figure 4.Schematic illustration of experiments.Female rats (in pink at top) were injected with either an inducible RFRP-shRNA or a scrambled control virus. Each group was furthered separated into a no stress control or subjected to 18 days of immobilization stress. Stressed females exhibited fewer successful copulation events, fewer pregnancies in those that did successfully mate, and increased frequency of embryo resorption. These marked effects of stress on fertility were completely blocked by knockdown of RFRP3.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.04316.007 Adult female Sprague-Dawley rats were triple-housed on a 12/12-hr light-dark cycle with lights on at 0700 hr and ad libitum food and water. For all studies, rats were acclimated for a week and then vaginal smears were obtained daily to verify normal cyclicity for 12 days before the studies commenced. Rats that did not cycle normally were removed from the study. For the chronic stress experiment, rats were immobilized daily from 9 am to 12 pm (N = 6 for each cycle time point) or left undisturbed in their home cages (N = 6 for each cycle time point) until terminal samples were collected (stress paradigm described below). In the RFRP knockdown study, animals received stereotaxic injections of either RFRP-shRNA (N = 30) or scrambled control (N = 28), then allowed to recover for 3 weeks. After recovery, rats were exposed to the same stress paradigm as the previous experiment. After cessation of stress all animals were left undisturbed in their home cage for 4 days, and on the night of the fourth day observed during timed mating (see below). Rats that successfully mated were left in their home cages for the duration of gestation and then perfused within 24 hr after parturition. (stress/shRNA, N = 14, control/shRNA, N = 20, stress/scrambled, N = 14, control/scrambled, N = 17). One cage of control/scrambled animals were removed from analysis due to fighting. All animal care and procedures were approved by the University of California-Berkeley Animal Care and Use Committee (Protocol R303-0313BC).
Whereas it is well established that chronic stress induces female reproductive dysfunction, whether stress negatively impacts fertility and fecundity when applied prior to mating and pregnancy has not been explored. In this study, we show that stress that concludes 4 days prior to mating results in persistent and marked reproductive dysfunction, with fewer successful copulation events, fewer pregnancies in those that successfully mated, and increased embryo resorption. Chronic stress exposure led to elevated expression of the hypothalamic inhibitory peptide, RFamide-related peptide-3 (RFRP3), in regularly cycling females. Remarkably, genetic silencing of RFRP3 during stress using an inducible-targeted shRNA completely alleviates stress-induced infertility in female rats, resulting in mating and pregnancy success rates indistinguishable from non-stress controls. We show that chronic stress has long-term effects on pregnancy success, even post-stressor, that are mediated by RFRP3. This points to RFRP3 as a potential clinically relevant single target for stress-induced infertility.
Infertility has become alarmingly common in otherwise healthy women and around 15% of healthy couples younger than 30 years old are unable to conceive within the first year of trying. High-stress levels are known to decrease short-term fertility in humans and other animals, which may serve to prevent pregnancy during times when food or other resources are in short supply.