 The Golgi apparatus is a central feature of the secretory pathway in all eukaryotic cells. In higher eukaryotes, the Golgi stack consists of four to six flattened cisternae, which contain a series of glycosyl-transferases and other resident membrane proteins. These are localized in the order of their function in distinct steady-state distributions along the axis between the cis (entry) and the trans (exit) face, as a result of a dynamic equilibrium resulting from a balance of anterograde (ER → cis → trans) and retrograde (trans → cis and Golgi → ER) flows. Proteins secreted from the cell, as well as constituents of the plasma membrane and a broad variety of membrane-enclosed compartments pass through the ER-Golgi system in the anterograde direction, diverging only as they depart the Golgi stack at its trans face (also termed the TGN). During this anterograde passage they are typically glycosylated in a step-wise fashion as they encounter the responsible enzymes (Emr et al., 2009; Klumperman, 2011). To assess inter-Golgi exchange in real time we fused two populations of HeLa cells, one containing GFP tagged galactosyltransferase (GT-GFP) with a second containing RFP tagged sialyltransferase (ST-RFP) (Schaub et al., 2006) (Figure 1). The cells were separately transfected, combined and allowed to spread as a mixed population on a cover slip. At the steady state in HeLa cells, GT and ST have partially overlapping distributions in Golgi cisternae (Rabouille et al., 1995; Schaub et al., 2006). GT is localized in the trans Golgi cisternae, while ST is localized in the trans and trans-most/TGN cisternae. The cell population containing GT-GFP was also transfected with VSV-G protein to enable us to trigger cell-cell fusion with a brief acidic exposure (Florkiewicz and Rose, 1984). Following pH 5 exposure, the fused cells were immediately monitored by confocal video-microscopy, enabling us to record the time dependence of exchange of these markers between the Golgi populations in the fused cells from the onset of fusion. Importantly, all the experiments were performed at 20°C and in the presence of cycloheximide (unless mentioned otherwise), to block new synthesis of GT-GFP and ST-RFP in the ER during the experiment and to block exit of these markers from the Golgi while enabling transport in the Golgi to proceed (Matlin and Simons, 1983). Each Golgi area remains tightly associated with its original nucleus for at least 2 hr, longer than the maximum time course of the exchange experiments.10.7554/eLife.01296.003Figure 1.General procedure.HeLa cells co-expressing a GFP-labeled Golgi localized protein and VSV-G are mixed with HeLa cells expressing a RFP-labeled Golgi localized protein. Cell fusion is triggered by acidic exposure of cell surface targeted VSV-G. Cycloheximide was added 1 hr prior to fusing the cells and during the imaging procedure, to prevent de novo protein synthesis. Golgi-content mixing is assessed by live imaging confocal imaging, visualization and characterization of the putative transport intermediates are assessed by STED microscopy.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.01296.003 This report describes a study specifically intended to test the predictions of the vesicular transport model. Our reasoning was that only mobile carriers, such as COPI vesicles, should be able to travel the long distance between well-separated Golgi of fused cells. Our results clearly establish that only small cargoes (anterograde or resident proteins) are exchanged, showing that inter-Golgi carriers are capable of size-filtration, and that small cargo transport must utilize a distributive mechanism different from the mechanism used by large soluble aggregates. More than half of the carriers exclusively contained anterograde cargo, suggesting sub-populations of COPI vesicles as previously documented by immuno-EM (Orci et al., 1997). GT-GFP and ST-RFP were a gift from J Roher (Schaub et al., 2006). The VSV-G-encoding vector was provided by JK Rose (Florkiewicz and Rose, 1984). ss-GFP-FM4-CD8 (CD8lumenal)was generated by sequential insertion of GFP and CD8 encoding sequences into a pC4-FM4 backbone vector (ARIAD), using XbaI/SpeI compatibility, and BamH1 restriction site. CD8-GFP was amplified from pC4-CD8-GFP as previously described (Lavieu et al., 2010). ss-DsRed-FM4-hGH was created by adding DsRed into pC4S1-FM4-FCS-hGH (ARIAD) using XbaI/SpeI compatibility. ARF1Q71L was cleaved from ARF1Q71L-GFP, a gift from G Romero (Vasudevan et al., 1998) and inserted into a mDsRed vector (Clontech). GST tagged PKD-(DI) was a gift from Vivek Malhotra. GT-CFP and GT-YFP and YFP-Sar1H79 G (Quintero et al., 2010) were a gift from C Giraudo. RAb5A-RFP and RAb7-GFP were a gift from P De Camilli.
A core prediction of the vesicular transport model is that COPI vesicles are responsible for trafficking anterograde cargoes forward. In this study, we test this prediction by examining the properties and requirements of inter-Golgi transport within fused cells, which requires mobile carriers in order for exchange of constituents to occur. We report that both small soluble and membrane-bound secretory cargo and exogenous Golgi resident glycosyl-transferases are exchanged between separated Golgi. Large soluble aggregates, which traverse individual stacks, do not transfer between Golgi, implying that small cargoes (which can fit in a typical transport vesicle) are transported by a different mechanism. Super-resolution microscopy reveals that the carriers of both anterograde and retrograde cargoes are the size of COPI vesicles, contain coatomer, and functionally require ARF1 and coatomer for transport. The data suggest that COPI vesicles traffic both small secretory cargo and steady-state Golgi resident enzymes among stacked cisternae that are stationary.
All eukaryotic cells contain an organelle called the Golgi apparatus, which consists of a series of four to six flattened structures called cisternae. Proteins that are intended for secretion from the cell, or proteins that go on to become part of the cell membrane, must pass through the Golgi, where they undergo modifications that ensure they are targeted to the correct place.