 Nearly one third of the eukaryotic proteins are synthesized at the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) and then transported to their cellular destinations through the secretory pathway. Over the years, the general organization of membrane transport along the secretory pathway has been gradually unraveled (Mellman and Simons, 1992; Mellman and Warren, 2000), and many of the underlying molecular components have been identified (Rothman, 2002; Schekman, 2002; Emr et al., 2009). Some key questions, however, remain unresolved (Pfeffer, 2007; Emr et al., 2009; Glick and Luini, 2011). As prototypes of soluble proteins we used albumin and α1-antitrypsin (hereinafter termed antitrypsin). These are globular, water-soluble proteins roughly 3 nm in diameter that should easily diffuse through the 30-60 nm wide Golgi intercisternal connections (Trucco et al., 2004). Albumin is an abundant, non-glycosylated protein, while antitrypsin is N-glycosylated. The trafficking of soluble proteins (albumin in most experiments) was characterized and compared with that of PC-I (Weinstock and Leblond, 1974; Bonfanti et al., 1998; Mironov et al., 2001) and vesicular stomatitis virus G protein (VSVG) (Bergmann and Singer, 1983; Mironov et al., 2001; Patterson et al., 2008), because these cargoes have been extensively characterized and shown to move by cisternal progression (or rimmal progression [Lavieu et al., 2013] or compartment progression [Mironov et al., 2013]. For the sake of brevity, from now onward we will use the term compartment progression to describe the traffic of procollagen and other similar cargo). Thus, if albumin moves by diffusion via continuities, it should exhibit transport kinetics and patterns different from VSVG and PC-I. PC-I forms large, stable, non-diffusible aggregates that cannot enter tubules or vesicles and cross the Golgi stack in a gradual fashion by compartment progression (Bonfanti et al., 1998; Trucco et al., 2004); and VSVG is a large trimeric transmembrane viral protein that shows the same trafficking pattern as PC-I, at least under certain specific conditions (see below). In this study, we only used conditions under which VSVG crosses the Golgi by compartment progression. The main findings of this study are that soluble cargo proteins such as albumin traverse the Golgi complex rapidly by a mechanism that is different from compartment progression and involves diffusion via intercisternal continuities. This fast diffusion-based transport coexists in the same Golgi stacks with the slower movement of supramolecular cargo such as PC by compartment progression. HepG2 human hepatoma and HeLa cells (both from ATCC) were grown in Minimum Essential Medium (MEM) supplemented with 10% foetal calf serum, glutamine and antibiotics. Human fibroblasts were grown and used as described previously (Mironov et al., 2001). The following polyclonal antibodies were used: anti-GM130 (MA De Matteis, TIGEM, Italy), anti-TGN46 (S Ponnambalam, Leeds University, UK), anti-albumin and anti-α1-antitrypsin (DAKO, Denmark), and anti-VSVG (MA De Matteis). The following were also used: nanogold-conjugated Fab fragments of anti-rabbit IgG and Gold Enhancer (Nanoprobes, Yaphank, NY); Protein A conjugated with colloidal gold (J Slot, Utrecht University, The Netherlands); and anti-rabbit, anti-mouse and anti-sheep antibodies conjugated with Alexa Fluor 488, Alexa Fluor 546 and Alexa Fluor 633 (Molecular Probes Europe BV, The Netherlands). GTPγS and CHX were from Sigma (St. Louis, MO). The FUGENE6 transfection reagent (used following the manufacturer instructions) was from Roche (Basel, Switzerland). To express constructs in human fibroblasts (which were difficult to transfect), microinjection was performed. Albumin was expressed efficiently in 50% of injected cells. Of these, 30% expressed both albumin and PC, while the other 70% expressed only albumin. The other 50% of the injected cells contained PC and very little or no albumin, indicating that these human fibroblasts prefer to express either one or the other of these cargoes. Unless otherwise indicated, all other chemicals and reagents were obtained from previously described sources (Mironov et al., 2001).
The mechanism of transport through the Golgi complex is not completely understood, insofar as no single transport mechanism appears to account for all of the observations. Here, we compare the transport of soluble secretory proteins (albumin and α1-antitrypsin) with that of supramolecular cargoes (e.g., procollagen) that are proposed to traverse the Golgi by compartment progression-maturation. We show that these soluble proteins traverse the Golgi much faster than procollagen while moving through the same stack. Moreover, we present kinetic and morphological observations that indicate that albumin transport occurs by diffusion via intercisternal continuities. These data provide evidence for a transport mechanism that applies to a major class of secretory proteins and indicate the co-existence of multiple intra-Golgi trafficking modes.
The Golgi is a structure within cells where proteins and other large molecules are modified and prepared for delivery to locations inside or outside of the cell. Each Golgi is made from a stack of flattened sacs called cisternae that are filled with fluid and enclosed by a membrane.