 Skeletal muscle degeneration, which is characterized by the progressive depletion of muscle strength, occurs in a variety of chronic diseases including advanced cancer, congestive heart failure, and AIDS (Tisdale, 2002). The underlying intercellular mechanism is currently thought to be multifactorial. Inflammatory cytokines, particularly TNF-α, have been shown to be key mediators of cancer-related skeletal muscle degeneration (Tisdale, 2002; Seruga et al., 2008). Elevated levels of TNF-α precede the onset of cancer-related skeletal muscle degeneration and act through several cancer-related signaling pathways such as the p53 and nuclear factor kappa B (NF-κB) pathways (Guttridge et al., 2000; Cai et al., 2004; Schwarzkopf et al., 2006). To gain insights into the role of Rb in cancer-related skeletal muscle degeneration, we first examined the phosphorylation kinetics and subcellular localization of Rb in TNF-α-treated HSMMs. For this purpose, cells were pretreated with interferon-gamma (IFN-γ, 100 ng/ml) for 8 hr prior to initial TNF-α treatment in order to promote cellular sensitivity to the effects of TNF-α (Tsujimoto et al., 1986). During differentiation from myoblasts to myotubes (from day 0 to day 4), Rb shifted from a phosphorylated to an unphosphorylated state (Figure 1A). Moreover, following TNF-α treatment Rb phosphorylation on the CDK4-specific phosphorylation site, serine 780 (Kitagawa et al., 1996), was induced (Figure 1A). This was not observed on threonine 821, a CDK2-specific phosphorylation site (Halaban, 2005). In untreated HSMMs, Rb was primarily present in the nucleus, but translocated to the cytoplasm after TNF-α treatment (Figure 1B,C). In addition, we found that phosphorylated Rb in TNF-α-treated HSMMs was predominantly located in the cytoplasm (Figure 1D). In accordance with the induction of Rb phosphorylation on a CDK4-specific phosphorylation site, TNF-α treatment led to an increase in the level of nuclear CDK4 (Figure 1E). The vast majority of nuclear Rb was in an unphosphorylated state, while cytoplasmic Rb that accumulated after TNF-α treatment was in a phosphorylated state (Figure 1E). We then tested whether TNF-α-induced cytoplasmic accumulation of Rb is caused by CDK4-mediated Rb phosphorylation. When CDK4 was depleted by short hairpin RNA (shRNA), cytoplasmic accumulation of Rb induced by TNF-α was decreased (Figure 1F-H). These results suggest that phosphorylation of Rb by CDK4 triggers its cytoplasmic translocation in HSMMs.10.7554/eLife.01228.003Figure 1.TNF-α induces cytoplasmic translocation of Rb.(A-E) HSMMs were treated with TNF-α for 2 days. (A) CDK4-mediated phosphorylation of Rb is induced by TNF-α treatment. At the indicated time points after differentiation stimuli, total cell lysates were prepared and immunoprecipitated with anti-Rb antibody, followed by immunoblotting. TNF-α was added for the last 2 days of 6-day cultures. The open and solid arrowheads indicate the position of phosphorylated and unphosphorylated Rb, respectively. (B) Cytoplasmic translocation of Rb is caused by TNF-α treatment. Z-stack confocal images of Rb and 4′,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI)-stained nuclei were obtained (50 slices at 0.3-μm intervals). X-Y section images for Rb and DAPI-stained nuclei and X-Z section images for Rb along yellow lines in the X-Y section images are shown. Scale bar, 20 μm. (C) Line plots denote the fluorescence intensities of Rb (red lines) and DAPI (blue lines) along the yellow lines in B. Intensity values were normalized by the maximum value of each plot. a.u., arbitrary units. (D) Phosphorylated Rb is localized in the cytoplasm. Confocal images for Rb phosphorylated at S780 (red) and DAPI-stained nuclei (blue). Scale bar, 20 μm. (E) Nuclear CDK4 expression is increased after TNF-α treatment. Cytoplasmic (Cyto) and nuclear (Nuc) lysates were analyzed by immunoblotting with the antibodies indicated. Tubulin and TFIIB were used as loading controls for cytoplasmic and nuclear lysates, respectively. The open and solid arrowheads indicate the position of phosphorylated and unphosphorylated Rb. (F-H) HSMMs were infected with adenoviruses expressing control non-target shRNA or shRNA against CDK4 at a MOI of 10 pfu/nucleus and then treated with TNF-α for 2 days. (F) Experimental design and reference time frame. (G) The cytoplasmic (Cyto) and nuclear (Nuc) lysates were analyzed by immunoblotting. (H) TNF-α-induced cytoplasmic translocation of Rb is prevented by CDK4 depletion. The cytoplasmic and nuclear lysates were subjected to immunoprecipitation and probed by immunoblotting. The open and solid arrowheads indicate the position of phosphorylated and unphosphorylated Rb, respectively.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.01228.003 In this study, we have elucidated a novel pathway of cancer-related skeletal muscle degeneration. TNF-α induces CDK4 activation and the concomitant phosphorylation of Rb. Subsequently, cytoplasmic translocation of Rb is triggered. Cytoplasmic Rb disrupts sarcomeric organization, which may be caused by dysfunction of mDia1. The precise role of mDia1 in the regulation of sarcomeric organization is poorly understood (Sparrow and Schock, 2009), but the contribution of mDia1 to sarcomeric organization is supported. When mDia1 was depleted by shRNA, the lateral periodicity in the distribution of α-actinin was markedly perturbed (Figure 10A,B). The importance of actin nucleation factors for the periodic assembly of sarcomeres is proposed by the recent observations that depletion of actin nucleation factors, such as Fhod3 and leiomodin, results in disordered α-actinin distribution in cardiomyocytes (Chereau et al., 2008; Taniguchi et al., 2009; Iskratsch et al., 2010). The notion that the degree of sarcomeric disorganization is dependent on the inhibition of actin polymerization is further supported by our data that show Z-disk alignment is more severely impaired by longer-term treatment of cytochalasin D (Figure 4).10.7554/eLife.01228.015Figure 10.mDia1 is critical for sarcomeric organization.(A and B) HSMMs were infected with adenoviruses expressing control non-target shRNA or shRNA against mDia1 at a MOI of 5 pfu/nucleus for 4 days. (A) Depletion of mDia1 protein was verified by immunoblotting. (B) Confocal images for F-actin and α-actinin. Scale bar, 10 μm.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.01228.015 Early passage human skeletal myoblasts purchased from Lonza (Basel, Switzerland) were cultured according to the manufacturer’s instructions using Lonza-supplied growth medium (SkGM-2 BulletKit). Cells grown to approximately 80% confluence were induced to differentiate into multinucleated myotubes by switching to differentiation medium (DMEM-F12 containing 2% horse serum). Under these conditions, numerous myotubes could be detected on the fourth day. For TNF-α treatment, HSMMs were cultured in fresh serum-free media containing TNF-α (100 ng/ml) for 2 days. TNF-α was repeatedly added every 24 hr. Recombinant human TNF-α and IFN-γ were purchased from PeproTech (Rocky Hill, NJ). Cytochalasin D was obtained from Sigma (St. Louis, MO).
Skeletal muscle degeneration is a complication arising from a variety of chronic diseases including advanced cancer. Pro-inflammatory cytokine TNF-α plays a pivotal role in mediating cancer-related skeletal muscle degeneration. Here, we show a novel function for retinoblastoma protein (Rb), where Rb causes sarcomeric disorganization. In human skeletal muscle myotubes (HSMMs), up-regulation of cyclin-dependent kinase 4 (CDK4) and concomitant phosphorylation of Rb was induced by TNF-α treatment, resulting in the translocation of phosphorylated Rb to the cytoplasm. Moreover, induced expression of the nuclear exporting signal (NES)-fused form of Rb caused disruption of sarcomeric organization. We identified mammalian diaphanous-related formin 1 (mDia1), a potent actin nucleation factor, as a binding partner of cytoplasmic Rb and found that mDia1 helps maintain the structural integrity of the sarcomere. These results reveal a novel non-nuclear function for Rb and suggest a potential mechanism of TNF-α-induced disruption of sarcomeric organization.
Skeletal muscles, such as the biceps and calves, are one of three main muscle groups in the body, and a range of chronic diseases—including cancer, heart disease and AIDS—can cause wasting and a loss of strength in these muscles. Many different cellular processes are known to be involved in the degeneration of skeletal muscle during illness.