 Anterograde transport (cis → trans) through the Golgi stack is a prerequisite for virtually all proteins that are ultimately secreted from the cell, targeted to the cell surface membrane, or localized in a plethora of internal membrane-bound compartments in plants and animals. Despite the fact that this fundamental process was first recognized over 50 years ago, there is still today no general agreement on how it works. The greatest distinction among the competing models for anterograde transport (reviewed in Rothman, 2010) is whether the 4-6 cisternae typically comprising the Golgi stack are proposed to be static or mobile over the time scale of protein flow across the Golgi (typically 5-20 min). As the basic unit of a lumenal membrane staple we designed a chimeric protein, termed CD8lumenal, that contained a signal sequence, for its proper insertion and translocation across the ER membrane, fused to 1) a fluorescent protein (GFP or DsRed) to track the protein within the cells by confocal microscopy, 2) four repeats of a domain (FM4) designed to self-aggregate in trans in the absence of the disaggregating drug (AP21998) (Rollins et al., 2000), and 3) the CD8 protein, known to be a trans-membrane protein ultimately targeted to the plasma membrane (Hennecke and Cosson, 1993; Lavieu et al., 2010). This CD8lumenal protein should initially reside in the ER oriented with its FM4-containing aggregation domain facing the lumen, and so long as it remains non-aggregated (in the presence of AP21998) should be effectively transported to the cell surface. On the other hand, if AP21998 is removed while in the ER—or at any later stage of transport through the Golgi—then intra-lumenal adhesions are expected to form as CD8lumenal aggregates homo-typically in trans, like a cadherin. These staples are expected to remain in the ER if they are planar and too large to be packaged into a small COPII vesicle. Various structural models suggest a planar adhesion plaque will form that closely links two sides of ER lamellae or tubules, with an intra-lumenal separation between the stapled membranes that from first principles could vary from 10 to 23 nm (Figure 1A), depending on the preferred arrangement of trans-aggregating FM4 domains. In particular, however, if repeat FM domains interact like cadherins (Miyaguchi, 2000; Pokutta and Weis, 2007) primarily via their most-membrane distant module (i.e., at their tips), then we would expect a membrane separation in the stapled state close to 25 nm (model 1 in Figure 1A).10.7554/eLife.00558.003Figure 1.Aggregated-CD8Lumenal as an ER staple.(A) Domains harbored by CD8lumenal. Predicted models of trans-interacting CD8lumenal preoteins that are expected to form lumenal staples. Predicted intra-lumenal space varies from 10 to 23 nm. (B) Electron-micrograph showing ER of HeLa cells expressing CD8lumenal in the absence of the disaggregating drug. ER-aggregated CD8lumenal, which form ER-staples, appear as electron-dense flat features (red square). (C) Lumenal staples trigger lumenal constriction of ER tubules, consistent with model 1.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.00558.00310.7554/eLife.00558.004Figure 1—figure supplement 1.Cytosolic staples stack the ER.HeLa cells expressing CD8cytosolic were incubated without the disaggregating drug. Electron-micrograph showing that cytosolic staples trigger artificial stacking of ER membranes.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.00558.004 Does the presence of staples perturb anterograde transport? On the one hand, because staples freely diffuse like any other membrane constituent it is hard to imagine how a moderate amount of staples would broadly perturb Golgi transport or function such as glycosylation, and there is no positive evidence from our studies that they do so. On the other hand, because they span and link between two sides of the cisterna, it is easy to see why staples should remain in the thin centers of the cisternae, far from the dilated rims (whose width is too great to accommodate the staples) where transport vesicles bud, and also why staples would be sterically excluded from budding COPI or other vesicles if they did occasionally reach a rim, and thus would remain within the cisterna. HeLa cells were maintained at 37°C in 5% CO2 in DMEM (Gibco, Grand Island, NY, United States) supplemented with 10% FBS (Gibco). Saos-2 cells were maintained with the same media supplemented with ascorbate (25 μg/ml). HeLa cells were transfected using lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen, Grand Island, NY, United States) as recommended by the manufacturer. Saos-2 cells were transfected using electroporation (Nepa21type II model from Nepa gene, Chiba, Japan).
We have designed a membrane ‘staple’, which consists of membrane-anchored repeats of the trans-aggregating FM domain that face the lumen of the secretory pathway. In the presence of the disaggregating drug these proteins transit the secretory pathway. When the drug is removed these proteins form electron-dense plaques which we term staples. Unexpectedly, when initially positioned within the cis-Golgi, staples remained at the cis face of the Golgi even after many hours. By contrast, soluble FM-aggregates transited the Golgi. Staples and soluble aggregates placed in cis-Golgi cisternae therefore have different fates. Whereas the membrane staples are located in the flattened, stacked central regions of the cisternae, the soluble aggregates are in the dilated rims. This suggests that while the cisternae are static on the time scale of protein traffic, the dilated rims are mobile and progress in the cis → trans direction via a mechanism that we term ‘Rim Progression’.
Most plant and animal cells contain an organelle known as the Golgi apparatus, which consists of a series of four to six stacked cisternae. Almost all the proteins that are secreted from the cell, or targeted to its plasma membrane, transit through the Golgi. This process takes roughly 5-20 min.