 It has been estimated that close to one-third of newly synthesized proteins cannot properly fold and are therefore subjected to rapid intracellular degradation (Schubert et al., 2000). Both the large scale of this process and the toxicity of misfolded proteins dictate that protein folding must be tightly controlled. When cellular protein folding demands in the cell exceed capacity, misfolded proteins accumulate within the endoplasmic reticulum (ER), causing ER stress. In many human diseases, especially metabolic and neurodegenerative disorders, cellular folding capacities are overwhelmed by increased protein synthesis rates and/or accumulation of abnormal proteins, resulting in ER stress-mediated cell toxicity or death (Lin et al., 2008). To test whether LRH-1 is involved in ER stress resolution, we treated Lrh-1 liver-specific knockout (Lrh-1LKO) mice and control littermates (Lrh-1f/f) with the ER stress inducer tunicamycin (TM), which primarily affects the liver. Lrh-1LKO mice exhibited profound hepatic lipid accumulation by 48 hr following stress, as evidenced by macroscopic evaluation (Figure 1A) and measurement of increased hepatic triglycerides and free fatty acids (Figure 1B). We also observed increased TUNEL staining by 72 hr following stress in Lrh-1LKO mice, confirming that the prolonged ER stress had resulted in increased apoptosis (Figure 1C,D). As expected, Lrh-1LKO mice exhibit increased caspase and PARP cleavage following TM (Figure 1E). To confirm that this response was associated with misfolded proteins, we stained primary hepatocytes from TM-treated control and Lrh-1LKO mice with Thioflavin T, which fluoresces when bound to protein aggregates and therefore can be used to quantitate ER stress (Beriault and Werstuck, 2013). We observed little increase in staining for control cells treated with TM, suggesting that resolvable ER stress induced by TM does not result in significant protein aggregation, but observed strong staining in Lrh-1LKO cells increasing over time treated with TM (Figure 1F).10.7554/eLife.01694.003Figure 1.Lrh-1 is required for ER stress resolution and for protection against stress-induced lipid accumulation and cell death.(A) Macroscopic visualization of steatosis following ER stress in Lrh-1 LKO mice. Mice were i.p. injected with 1 mg/kg tunicamycin (TM) or vehicle and livers photographed following sacrifice. Representative of 3-6 mice per group. (B) Quantification of hepatic triglycerides and non-esterified free fatty acids of control (Lrh-1f/f) and Lrh-1LKO mice (n = 3-6) injected with TM or vehicle. (C) Representative hepatic TUNEL staining for apoptosis of control and Lrh-1LKO mice injected with 1 mg/kg TM and sacrificed at 72 hr. Green fluorescence represents TUNEL-positive and blue represents DAPI-positive (merged image on right). Magnification at 40x (objective). Representative of three mice per group. (D) Quantification of TUNEL-positive cells for control and Lrh-1LKO mice treated with TM and sacrificed at 72 hr. Ratio of TUNEL-positive to DAPI-positive cells was calculated from three fields of each slide (n = 3). Significance at p<0.05. (E) Immunoblot of cleaved PARP, cleaved caspase 3, and cleaved caspase 6 in cytoplasmic fractions generated from control and Lrh-1LKO mice (n = 3-6; pooled) injected with 1 mg/kg tunicamycin (TM) or vehicle. β-actin was used as a loading control. (F) Thioflavin T fluorescence of protein aggregates in primary hepatocytes prepared from control and Lrh-1LKO mice, treated with vehicle or 0.01 µg/ml TM, and fixed in 4% PFA before staining with 500 µM Thioflavin T. Magnification at 10x (objective). Representative of three mice per group. (G) Immunoblot of nuclear spliced XBP-1, cleaved ATF6, and ATF4 for control and Lrh-1LKO mice (n = 3-6; pooled) injected with 1 mg/kg tunicamycin (TM) or vehicle. TBP was used as a loading control.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.01694.00310.7554/eLife.01694.004Figure 1—figure supplement 1.Loss of Lrh-1 does not result in loss of UPR target genes in response to stress.Relative expression by quantitative PCR for genes dependent on each of the three UPR pathways. RNA was collected at designated timepoints for control and Lrh-1LKO mice treated with vehicle or 1 mg/kg tunicamycin (TM) (n=3-6). Data was normalized to Tbp expression.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.01694.004 Our studies have identified an unexpected yet essential pathway for hepatic ER stress resolution initiated by the nuclear receptor LRH-1 (Figure 8). Following ER stress, LRH-1 is recruited to the Plk3 promoter and dramatically induces transcription of this atypical kinase. This is essential for ATF2 phosphorylation, which is profoundly deficient in Lrh-1LKO hepatocytes in response to stress. PLK3 is required for ATF2 activation following ER stress, and that Plk3−/− mice, like Lrh-1LKO mice, are defective in ER stress resolution. The similar impact of loss of Lrh-1 and loss of Plk3 predicted that restoration of Plk3 induction to Lrh-1LKO mice could be sufficient to rescue their ability to resolve ER stress. We found that restoring Plk3 induction to primary Lrh-1LKO hepatocytes did restore their ability to phosphorylate ATF2 and also resulted in decreased fat accumulation at later times after ER stress. More importantly, the Lrh-1LKO hepatocytes resolved ER stress similar to wild-type cells when Plk3 induction was reinstated.10.7554/eLife.01694.013Figure 8.Mechanism of LRH-1’s requirement in ER stress resolution.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.01694.013 Lrh-1 liver specific knockout (Lrh-1LKO) mice were obtained by crossing mice with an Lrh-1 allele flanked by LoxP sites (Lrh-1f/f) with albumin-Cre transgenic mice. Lrh-1f/f mice were provided by the Kliewer/Mangelsdorf lab and have been previously described (Lee et al., 2008); albumin-Cre transgenic mice were provided by Bert O’Malley’s laboratory at Baylor College of Medicine. Wild-type and Plk3−/− mice were obtained from Peter Stambrook’s lab and have been previously described (Myer et al., 2011). Male mice 8-12 weeks of age were injected intraperitoneally with tunicamycin (1 mg/kg body weight) or vehicle (2% DMSO) in 150 mM dextrose. A dose of 0.5 mg/kg TM was used for Plk3 WT and Plk3−/− mice due to sensitivity of this strain to the drug. Conditionally expressed humanized Lrh-1 transgenic (hLrh-1 TG) mice were a kind gift from Franco DeMayo and were generated as previously described for hCoup-TF1 (Wu et al., 2010) unless otherwise indicated. In short, cDNA for human Lrh-1 was cloned into a shuttle vector, yielding an N terminus-FLAG-myc tandem-tagged protein. The shuttle vector was homologously recombined with a base vector containing two ROSA26 genomic sequences and a loxP-STOP-loxP cassette and transformed into 294-Flp cells for generation of the targeting construct. The targeting construct was linearized and electroporated into AB ES cells, instead of R1 cells as previously described. ES clones were screened and C57 chimeras were produced as previously described. Mice were maintained in a mixed background and crossed with Lrh-1f/f mice with one allele of albumin-Cre. We confirmed that hLrh-1 TG; Lrh-1LKO mice (hLrh-1 TG/+; Lrh-1f/f; albumin-Cre/+) had robust expression of hLrh-1 by PCR. Methods were approved by Baylor College of Medicine’s Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee.
Chronic endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress results in toxicity that contributes to multiple human disorders. We report a stress resolution pathway initiated by the nuclear receptor LRH-1 that is independent of known unfolded protein response (UPR) pathways. Like mice lacking primary UPR components, hepatic Lrh-1-null mice cannot resolve ER stress, despite a functional UPR. In response to ER stress, LRH-1 induces expression of the kinase Plk3, which phosphorylates and activates the transcription factor ATF2. Plk3-null mice also cannot resolve ER stress, and restoring Plk3 expression in Lrh-1-null cells rescues ER stress resolution. Reduced or heightened ATF2 activity also sensitizes or desensitizes cells to ER stress, respectively. LRH-1 agonist treatment increases ER stress resistance and decreases cell death. We conclude that LRH-1 initiates a novel pathway of ER stress resolution that is independent of the UPR, yet equivalently required. Targeting LRH-1 may be beneficial in human disorders associated with chronic ER stress.
A protein can only work properly if it has been folded into the correct shape. However, it is estimated that about one third of new proteins have the wrong shape. This is a major challenge for cells because misfolded proteins are often toxic, and cause many neurodegenerative and metabolic disorders.