 Almost every eukaryotic cell contains a specialized surface protrusion called the primary cilium (Singla and Reiter, 2006). Primary cilia serve as sensory antennae that register physical and chemical cues from the environment. Cilia are not only involved in for example, mechano-, chemo-, and photo-sensation but also in embryonic and neuronal development (Praetorius and Spring 2001; Singla and Reiter, 2006; Insinna and Besharse, 2008; Goetz and Anderson, 2010; Satir et al., 2010). Motile cilia, also called flagella, are used both as sensory antenna and motors that move fluids or propel cells (Salathe, 2007; Bloodgood, 2010; Lindemann and Lesich, 2010; Pichlo et al., 2014). Signaling in cilia and flagella is tightly regulated, spatially confined, and relies on a cilia-specific transport machinery (Rosenbaum and Witman, 2002; Delling et al., 2013; Chung et al., 2014; Pichlo et al., 2014). We engineered a targeting vector to express the beta subunit of photo activated adenylyl cyclase from the soil bacterium Beggiatoa (bPAC) under the control of the protamine 1 promoter (Prm1, Figure 1A) that is exclusively active in post-meiotic spermatids (Zambrowicz et al., 1993). Transgenic mice were generated by pronuclear injection using standard procedures (Ittner and Götz, 2007). Genomic insertion of the transgene was confirmed by PCR (Figure 1B). Protein expression of bPAC in testis lysates varied between different founder lines (Figure 1C). This variation in transgene expression reflects differences in integration site and/or copy number. For further analysis, founder lines 1 and 5 were chosen due to stable inheritance of the transgene to the next generation. The bPAC protein was exclusively expressed in sperm (Figure 1D-F). Prm1-bPAC males were fertile and did not show any defects during spermatogenesis, demonstrating that bPAC expression does not affect sperm development or function (Figure 1—source data 1).10.7554/eLife.05161.003Figure 1.Characterization of the Prm1-bPAC mouse.(A) Scheme of the Prm1-bPAC targeting vector. Expression of hemagglutinin (HA)-tagged bPAC is driven by the protamine 1 promoter (Prm1); arrows indicate the position of genotyping primers. (B) Genotyping by PCR. In Prm1-bPAC mice, a 213-bp fragment is amplified. The targeting vector served as a positive control (+). (C) Western blot analyzing bPAC-HA expression in testis lysates from different founder lines. Lysates from HEK cells expressing bPAC-HA served as positive control (+), wild-type testis lysates as negative control (−). (D) Western blot analyzing bPAC-HA expression in tissue lysates from male and female Prm1-bPAC mice. (E) Western blot analyzing bPAC-HA expression in testis and sperm. (F) Immunohistochemical analysis of bPAC-HA expression (left panel: transmission, right panel: fluorescence). Pictures at the bottom show a higher magnification (see white box). Sperm flagella are indicated (arrow). Cryosections of mouse testis were probed with anti-HA antibody and fluorescent secondary antibody (green), DNA was stained with DAPI (blue). Loading control for Western blots: β-tubulin.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.05161.00310.7554/eLife.05161.004Figure 1—source data 1.The Prm1-bPAC mouse model shows no change in fertility parameters.Data are given as mean ± s.d.; n = number of experiments.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.05161.004 In this study, we report on a transgenic mouse model designed to control cAMP signaling in sperm using optogenetics. We demonstrate that transgenic expression of bPAC in sperm does not interfere with the endogenous HCO3−-stimulated SACY activity. In fact, bPAC mimics the effect of SACY activity: the light-stimulated increase in cAMP levels is similar to that activated by HCO3− and activation of bPAC increases the flagellar beat frequency in a dose-dependent manner. Thus, the Prm1-bPAC mouse model is an ideal optogenetic tool to study cAMP signaling in sperm. The bPAC cDNA (beta subunit of photo-activated adenylyl cyclase from Beggiatoa sp. PS, BGP_1043; modified for expression in mammalian systems according to Stierl et al. (2011), GU461307) sequence was amplified via PCR. A hemagglutinin (HA) tag was fused to the C terminus, an EcoRI restriction site was added to the 5′ end and a BamHI and XhoI restriction site to the 3′ end by nested PCR. The PCR product was cloned into a pBluescript SK(-) vector (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, USA) using EcoRI and XhoI (pB-bPAC). After sequencing, the bPAC-HA insert was excised and cloned into pPrCExV (a kind gift from Robert Braun, Jackson Laboratory) using EcoRI/BamHI. Transgenic mice were generated via pronuclear injection following standard procedures (Ittner and Götz, 2007) at the HET animal facility (University Hospital Bonn, Germany). Mice were genotyped by PCR using bPAC-specific primers (see also Figure 1A). Mice used in this study were 2-5 months of age. All animal experiments were in accordance with the relevant guidelines and regulations.
Optogenetics is a powerful technique to control cellular activity by light. The light-gated Channelrhodopsin has been widely used to study and manipulate neuronal activity in vivo, whereas optogenetic control of second messengers in vivo has not been examined in depth. In this study, we present a transgenic mouse model expressing a photoactivated adenylyl cyclase (bPAC) in sperm. In transgenic sperm, bPAC mimics the action of the endogenous soluble adenylyl cyclase (SACY) that is required for motility and fertilization: light-stimulation rapidly elevates cAMP, accelerates the flagellar beat, and, thereby, changes swimming behavior of sperm. Furthermore, bPAC replaces endogenous adenylyl cyclase activity. In mutant sperm lacking the bicarbonate-stimulated SACY activity, bPAC restored motility after light-stimulation and, thereby, enabled sperm to fertilize oocytes in vitro. We show that optogenetic control of cAMP in vivo allows to non-invasively study cAMP signaling, to control behaviors of single cells, and to restore a fundamental biological process such as fertilization.
Tiny hair-like structures called cilia on the outside of cells play many important roles, including detecting physical and chemical signals from the environment. Special cilia—called flagella—help cells to move around and perhaps the most well-known of these are sperm flagella, which propel sperm in their quest to fertilize the egg. A chemical messenger called cAMP is essential for the movement of sperm flagella.