 The morphology and assortment of voltage-dependent and voltage-independent conductances displayed by one particular neuronal type provide it with specific passive and active properties (Johnston and Wu, 1995; Hille, 2001). In turn, passive and active properties define the way the neuron produces or processes information, that is, its electrical phenotype. An important question we are facing as neurophysiologists is how to characterize the electrical phenotype of a neuronal type in the most unbiased manner, such that we can then study subtle variations in this phenotype under varying conditions (development, perturbations, disease). In the current study, we propose an approach based on the combination of current-clamp measurements and multi-dimensional analysis of the measured electrophysiological properties, which allowed us to characterize and precisely quantify developmental changes in the electrical phenotype of dopaminergic neurons of the substantia nigra pars compacta. In order to define the postnatal development of the intrinsic electrophysiological properties of SNc dopaminergic neurons, we recorded from SNc dopaminergic neurons in acute midbrain slices made from rats aged between 2 and 29 postnatal days (P2 to P29) in the presence of blockers of glutamatergic and GABAergic synaptic activities (Kynurenate and Picrotoxin). SNc dopaminergic neurons were identified based on their location, size, and morphology (Figure 1A) and their characteristic electrophysiological properties, including a slow AP and the presence of a large sag in response to hyperpolarizing current pulses (Figure 1B). Independent of the developmental stage, these electrophysiological features allowed reliable identification of SNc dopaminergic neurons vs SNc GABAergic neurons: when post hoc tyrosine hydroxylase immunolabeling was performed, dopaminergic identity was confirmed in 100% of the cases (n = 121, see Figure 1A).10.7554/eLife.04059.003Figure 1.Identification of substantia nigra pars compacta dopaminergic neurons during postnatal development.(A), top, fluorescent streptavidin labeling of P2 (left), P7 (center) and P21 (right) neurons filled with neurobiotin (NB). Middle, tyrosine hydroxylase (TH) immunolabeling of the same neurons. Bottom, merged images showing the NB (red) and TH (green) labeling, confirming the dopaminergic nature of the recorded neurons. (B), characteristic voltage traces obtained from P2 (top left), P7 (top center) and P21 (top right) subtantia nigra pars compacta dopaminergic neurons in response to hyperpolarizing (blue) and depolarizing (red) current pulses (bottom traces). At each developmental stage, dopaminergic neurons displayed consistent TH labeling (A), as well as a typical sag in response to hyperpolarizing current pulses (B) and a broad AP (not shown). Scale bars: A, 10 µm; B, vertical 20 mV, horizontal 500 ms. The horizontal dotted line in B indicates −60 mV.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.04059.003 In the present study, we characterized the development of electrophysiological behavior of rat SNc dopaminergic neurons in vitro over the first four postnatal weeks. We first demonstrate that SNc dopaminergic neurons switch from bursting to irregular to regular spontaneous activity pattern during the first three postnatal weeks. Using univariate analysis of 16 electrophysiological parameters (AP measurements, passive properties, excitability, etc…) and multivariate analyses (AHC and PCA) of 8 electrophysiological parameters, we demonstrate that the postnatal electrophysiological development of SNc dopaminergic neurons involves two major transitions occurring between P3 and P5 and between P9 and P11, respectively, and that mature in vitro electrophysiological behavior (regular pacemaking activity) is essentially attained by P15. Using pharmacology and dynamic-clamp, we then demonstrate that the two developmental transitions can be precisely reproduced by distinct manipulations of passive and active properties, suggesting heterogeneous timecourses of development of the underlying ion channels. This study thus proposes a comprehensive approach to (i) precisely define neuronal electrical phenotype, (ii) quantify its changes during development (or in varying conditions), and (iii) investigate the biophysical mechanisms underlying phenotypic changes. Acute slices were prepared from P2-P29 Wistar rats of either sex. All experiments were performed according to the European and institutional guidelines for the care and use of laboratory animals (Council Directive 86/609/EEC and French National Research Council). Rats were anesthetized with halothane (Nicholas Piramal India) and decapitated. The brain was immersed briefly in oxygenated ice-cold low-calcium artificial cerebrospinal fluid (aCSF) containing the following (in mM): 125 NaCl, 25 NaHCO3, 2.5 KCl, 1.25 NaH2PO4, 0.5 CaCl2, 4 MgCl2, 25 glucose, pH 7.4, oxygenated with 95% O2/5% CO2 gas. The cortices were removed and then coronal midbrain slices (250 μm) were cut on a vibratome (Leica VT 1200S) in oxygenated ice-cold low calcium aCSF. Following 30-45 min incubation in 32°C oxygenated low calcium aCSF the slices were incubated for at least 30 min in oxygenated aCSF (125 NaCl, 25 NaHCO3, 2.5 KCl, 1.25 NaH2PO4, 2 CaCl2, 2 MgCl2 and 25 glucose, pH 7.4, oxygenated with 95% O2/5% CO2 gas) at room temperature prior to electrophysiological recordings.
Neurons have complex electrophysiological properties, however, it is often difficult to determine which properties are the most relevant to neuronal function. By combining current-clamp measurements of electrophysiological properties with multi-variate analysis (hierarchical clustering, principal component analysis), we were able to characterize the postnatal development of substantia nigra dopaminergic neurons' electrical phenotype in an unbiased manner, such that subtle changes in phenotype could be analyzed. We show that the intrinsic electrical phenotype of these neurons follows a non-linear trajectory reaching maturity by postnatal day 14, with two developmental transitions occurring between postnatal days 3-5 and 9-11. This approach also predicted which parameters play a critical role in phenotypic variation, enabling us to determine (using pharmacology, dynamic-clamp) that changes in the leak, sodium and calcium-activated potassium currents are central to these two developmental transitions. This analysis enables an unbiased definition of neuronal type/phenotype that is applicable to a range of research questions.
The brain contains hundreds of types of neurons, which differ in size and shape, and also in the chemicals that they use to communicate with each other. However, one thing all neurons have in common is that they all carry electrical signals that depend on the flow of ions through specialized channels in the membranes that surround each neuron. Nevertheless, the number and identity of these channels also vary markedly from one type of neuron to the next.