 Many elaborate behaviors, ranging from playing a guitar to engaging in a conversation, depend on the brain’s ability to integrate performance-related auditory feedback with the output of motor circuits controlling behavior. The synaptic mechanisms underlying the integration of sensory and motor-related signals remain enigmatic. Songbirds use auditory feedback to learn and maintain their vocalizations (Konishi, 1965; Price, 1979) and possess well-delineated neural circuits for singing (Nottebohm et al., 1982), thus providing an attractive organism in which to identify synaptic mechanisms for auditory-vocal integration. Nevertheless, despite important progress in identifying synaptic mechanisms of auditory-guided song plasticity (Mooney, 1992; Olveczky et al., 2005; Andalman and Fee, 2009; Roberts et al., 2010; Warren et al., 2011), how auditory feedback is integrated in the brain to affect the neural circuits for singing remains poorly understood. To determine whether synaptic inputs onto HVCX cells convey auditory feedback signals during singing, we made intracellular sharp electrode recordings from HVC neurons in unrestrained, young adult (∼95 days post hatch [dph]) male zebra finches using a modified version of recording techniques developed recently (Lee et al., 2006; Long et al., 2010) (Figure 1—figure supplement 1). We recorded from a total of 72 HVCX neurons in 11 birds as they engaged in spontaneous bouts of singing produced in social isolation (i.e., undirected song) and/or listened to playback of the bird’s own song (BOS). HVCX cells were identified either by antidromic stimulation methods (Figure 1A,B), DC current-evoked firing patterns (Mooney, 2000), or characteristic singing-related hyperpolarization (Long et al., 2010). As previously reported (Long et al., 2010), all HVCX cells we recorded without current injection showed spontaneous, regular action potential activity when the bird was not vocalizing (8.2 ± 5.8 Hz, mean ±SD), entered a hyperpolarized state within several hundred milliseconds before song onset (baseline −58.5 ± 7.1 mV, during singing −62.3 ± 7.3 mV), and all except two exhibited one or more action potential bursts during the utterance of the stereotyped sequence of syllables constituting the song motif (Figure 1D, Video 1). Each cell’s pattern of subthreshold membrane potential activity (Vm) and action potential bursts were highly stereotyped from one motif to the next and from bout to bout (Figure 1D).10.7554/eLife.01833.003Figure 1.Sharp intracellular recordings from sensorimotor neurons in singing birds.(A) Schematic illustrates the configuration of the in vivo intracellular recording methods used to measure subthreshold activity of HVCX neurons. Abbreviations: AFP, anterior forebrain pathway (light blue); SMP, song motor pathway (red); RA, robust nucleus of arcopallium; DLM, dorsolateral division of the medial thalamus; LMAN, lateral magno-cellular nucleus of the anterior nidopallium; VRN, brain stem vocal respiratory network, which includes the tracheosyringeal portion of the hypoglossal motor nucleus (nXIIts) and the respiratory premotor neurons located in the rostral ventrolateral medulla (RVL); R, rostral; D, dorsal. (B) Antidromic identification of HVCX neurons was achieved by electrically stimulating Area X combined with spike collision tests. (C) The experimental design used to generate distorted auditory feedback (DAF). Shortly (∼8 to 10 ms) after detecting that the bird sang the target syllable, a recorded version of the target syllable or a noise burst was played to the bird through a speaker (hit); DAF was suppressed on randomly chosen trials (catch). (D) Examples of HVCX intracellular membrane potential recordings during hit and catch conditions. Top: sonogram. Middle: simultaneously recorded HVCX neuron membrane potential. Bottom: expanded view of membrane potential traces aligned to the onset of the entire motif (iabcd), which was sung twice in this bout. The timing of DAF is shown in boxed and shaded regions.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.01833.00310.7554/eLife.01833.004Figure 1—figure supplement 1.The design of the integrated intracellular microdrive used in these experiments.(A) Schematic diagram of sharp intracellular microdrive, based on a Microdrive design developed by Michale Fee. (B) A male zebra finch with a microdrive implanted over HVC.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.01833.00410.7554/eLife.01833.005Figure 1—figure supplement 2.Flow of pre-target and target syllable detection.(1) First, a multi-taper estimate of spectrum density (Mitra and Pesaran, 1999; Thomson, 1982) of the most recent sound segment (5 ms duration) is calculated. We used the first two Slepian sequences (calculated by dpss function in MATLAB) with NW parameter = 4. (2) Features including sound amplitude, mean frequency, Wiener entropy, frequency modulation (FM), and pitch are calculated. A sound event is detected as a continuous sound chunk during which sound amplitude is higher than a threshold (set to ∼10 times from the baseline noise level). (3) At the end of each sound event, mean and variance of spectral features during the sound event are calculated to identify the pre-target syllable, using a support vector machine (SVM) algorithm. Only two dimensions from the test samples are shown. (4) Once the pre-target syllable is detected, the program starts to detect the onset of target syllables defined as the sound segments that satisfy pre-set conditions for at least 3 ms. If all the conditions are not satisfied for a fixed duration (∼100 ms), the program stops detecting the target syllable and starts to look for the pre-target syllable. (5) When the onset of the target syllable is detected, DAF is either executed immediately or suppressed with some probability (usually set to p=0.5).DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.01833.00510.7554/eLife.01833.006Figure 1—figure supplement 3.Contingent DAF drives adaptive changes in spectral features of the target syllable.When spectral features of a syllable meet certain criteria, white noise is played to the bird. This type of contingent DAF protocol is known to induce adaptive changes in the spectral features of song (Andalman and Fee, 2009; Warren et al., 2011). The criteria used here to trigger DAF were (1) sound amplitude ∼1-5 dB above baseline and (2) a mean frequency above or below a certain threshold (orange regions in [C and D]). This frequency threshold was iteratively adjusted to induce vocal changes in the birds. (A and B) Examples of target syllables (syllable b) that did not receive DAF (A) and that received DAF (B; denoted as b’). (C) Distribution of target syllable frequency as a function of number of syllable renditions (black dots, 10 ms window measured from target onset; red line is running average of syllable frequency). (D) Mean ± SD of the target syllable frequency on each day. The mean frequency of the target syllable shifted significantly after several days of contingent DAF in both upward (day1-4) and downward (day 5-9) directions (t-test, day 1 vs day 4, day 4 vs day 7, day 7 vs day 9, p<10−33). Here, the mean frequency threshold was set to <5000 Hz (days 1-4, escape in upward shift), >5800 Hz (days 5-7, escape in downward shift), and >5400 Hz (days 8 and 9, escape in downward shift).DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.01833.00610.7554/eLife.01833.017Video 1.Sharp intracellular current clamp recording made in an identified HVCX neuron from a freely behaving and singing male zebra finch.Left; microphone (blue), membrane potential (green), and speaker output (red) updated at 1 Hz. Right; simultaneously monitored image recorded through a webcam in the recording chamber. In this movie, sound is recorded through the webcam. The whole movie is played in normal speed (x1). Injection current was changed from negative (−0.67 nA), to zero current (0 nA).DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.01833.017 Resolving how feedback-related information enters the AFP is a critical step to understand neural mechanisms of vocal learning. HVCX cells are attractive candidates for providing this information because they provide auditory input to the AFP (Roy and Mooney, 2009), receive inputs that are weakened by deafening (Tschida and Mooney, 2012), and may receive inputs from DAF-sensitive neurons, including HVC interneurons (Sakata and Brainard, 2008; Keller and Hahnloser, 2009). Furthermore, some forms of mammalian cortical plasticity initially involve changes to inhibitory rather than excitatory synapses (Froemke et al., 2007; Keck et al., 2011), raising the possibility that DAF might alter inhibitory input onto HVCX cells prior to any changes in excitatory input. Therefore, although the singing-related action potential output of HVCX neurons is insensitive to DAF (Kozhevnikov and Fee, 2007; Prather et al., 2008), the possibility remained that these cells integrate input from feedback-sensing cells during singing at subthreshold levels, which could then trigger slower changes to synapses on HVCX neurons as a prelude to vocal plasticity (Tschida and Mooney, 2012). By directly measuring synaptic activity in singing birds, we found that singing-related synaptic activity in HVCX neurons lacks real-time sensitivity to feedback perturbation. Moreover, many HVCX cells that we recorded displayed auditory responses in non-singing states, including a subset of cells that exhibited auditory-motor mirroring, a property which has been theorized to arise through integration of real-time feedback signals (Hanuschkin et al., 2013). Therefore, although HVCX cells receive fast synaptic inputs from several sources that may have the potential to convey auditory feedback during singing, these inputs appear to be gated to an ‘off’ position during vocalization in zebra finches (Shea and Margoliash, 2003; Cardin and Schmidt, 2004; Coleman et al., 2007). All experiments were carried out in accordance with a protocol approved by Duke University Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. Data were collected from 14 adult (age range, 85-150 post hatch days) male zebra finches (Taeniopygia guttata): n = 11 for intracellular recordings in freely singing birds, n = 3 for HVC longitudinal imaging combined with LMAN lesion and deafening.
Songbirds use auditory feedback to learn and maintain their songs, but how feedback interacts with vocal motor circuitry remains unclear. A potential site for this interaction is the song premotor nucleus HVC, which receives auditory input and contains neurons (HVCX cells) that innervate an anterior forebrain pathway (AFP) important to feedback-dependent vocal plasticity. Although the singing-related output of HVCX cells is unaltered by distorted auditory feedback (DAF), deafening gradually weakens synapses on HVCX cells, raising the possibility that they integrate feedback only at subthreshold levels during singing. Using intracellular recordings in singing zebra finches, we found that DAF failed to perturb singing-related synaptic activity of HVCX cells, although many of these cells responded to auditory stimuli in non-singing states. Moreover, in vivo multiphoton imaging revealed that deafening-induced changes to HVCX synapses require intact AFP output. These findings support a model in which the AFP accesses feedback independent of HVC.
Whenever we speak, sing, or play a musical instrument, we use auditory feedback to fine-tune our movements to achieve the sound that we want. This same process is used by songbirds to learn and maintain their songs. As juvenile birds practice singing, they compare their vocalizations with their father’s song, which they will previously have stored in memory, and continually tweak their own song until the two versions match.