 Skilled performance in music, speech, or sports often involves long sequences of movements, which demand a precise sequential activation of different muscles in time. The ordering of these muscle activations—and hence the ordering of the movements of different body parts in space—is here referred to as the ‘spatial feature’ of a sequence. Additionally, movement sequences are often characterized by a stereotypical temporal structure or rhythm—their ‘temporal feature’. The latter can either emerge spontaneously as part of chunk formation (Sakai et al., 2003), or be directly relevant to the goal of the sequence, as in musical performance, dance, or speech (Shin and Ivry, 2002; Lewis and Miall, 2003; Repp, 2005; Kotz and Schwartze, 2010; Bläsing et al., 2012; Grahn, 2012; Penhune and Steele, 2012). One of the hallmarks of human motor performance is the ease with which experts can modify the temporal and spatial features of learned motor skills. For example, a pianist is able to play the same tune using different variations of the rhythm, and a fluent speaker can change separately the word order or the rhythmic profile of speech for effective communication. How is such flexibility in skilled actions achieved neurally? We used a visually cued motor learning task to induce and assess the acquisition of sequences involving finger movements (Kornysheva et al., 2013). Subjects were trained to produce nine finger sequences that were unique combinations of three temporal and three spatial sequence features (Figure 1) randomly generated for each subject. Half the participants trained and performed the sequences with the left, the other half with the right hand. Over the course of 3 days of training the force responses on the keyboard triggered by the visual stimulus became faster (Figure 2A). The average reaction time (RT) decreased from 410 ms (SD: 70) to 288 ms (SD: 48, Figure 2B). To assess the specificity of the improvement in motor performance to the trained sequences, we also tested participants on sequences composed of untrained spatial and temporal features. Subjects also reduced the RT for untrained sequences from 456 ms (SD: 90) to 346 ms (SD: 64), which suggests a general effect of visuomotor learning. However, the reduction was significantly smaller than that for the trained sequences (F(1,30) = 13.342, p=0.001), and there was no interaction with the group (right-hand-trained vs left hand, F(1,30) = 1.235, p=0.275). Overall error rates across conditions paralleled the RT findings (Figure 2—figure supplement 1). For trained sequences the error rate reduced from 46.1% (SD: 26.7) to 6.3% (SD: 4.9). For untrained from 52.1% (SD: 31.6) to 29.5% (SD: 21), suggesting that the RT findings were not due to a change in the speed-accuracy trade-off. During the fMRI session we only tested the nine trained sequences. The RTs increased as compared to the end of training (Figure 2B, t(31) = 6.57, p<0.0001). This occurred despite the subjects' familiarity with a supine position on a mock MRI bed during training and may be related to the fMRI noise during the performance of the task, the lack of any auditory movement feedback occurring, as well as a more restricted mobility in an MRI environment. Importantly, however, across subjects individual RTs during fMRI session strongly correlated with RTs for trained sequences in the last training block (r = 0.717, p<0.0001), indicating that the responses reflected consistent measures of behaviour.10.7554/eLife.03043.004Figure 2.Reaction time (RT) results.(A) Two trial examples of force traces show faster finger responses to visual stimuli after (‘post’) as opposed to the beginning of training (‘pre’). (B) Subjects showed general and sequence-specific learning during the training of the combined temporal and spatial sequences. The RT remained relatively stable across the fMRI session runs, albeit overall higher than at the end of training outside the MRI environment. (C) Post-test results. Left panel: repeating sequences nine times in the test phase yielded an immediate RT decrease for trained spatial sequences (blue) relative to untrained sequences (black), and only delayed RT differences for trained temporal sequences (red), in line with previous results (Kornysheva et al., 2013). Right panel: a boxplot displaying RT results across subjects and all sequence repetitions in the post-test revealed significant RT advantages for the trained sequence, as well as the trained spatial and trained temporal feature conditions when compared to untrained sequences, suggesting that both the finger order and their relative timing were represented independently. A double asterisk (**) indicates a significant difference between conditions with p<0.01. Errorbars in the lineplots and maximum and minimum RTs (boxplot whiskers) are corrected for differences in the mean RT across individuals, and therefore represent the interindividual variability of relative RT differences across conditions. In the boxplot, upper and lower edges signify the 75th (third quartile) and 25th percentile (first quartile), respectively. The median is designated as a horizontal white or black line in the box. Outliers (equal or above 3*interquartile range above the third quartile or below the first quartile) are depicted as filled circles, suspected outliers (1.5*interquartile range above the third quartile and below the first quartile) are depicted as unfilled circles, respectively.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.03043.00410.7554/eLife.03043.005Figure 2—figure supplement 1.Error rate paralleled the RT results during the training (A) and fMRI showing clear sequence-specific advantages for the trained sequences, as well as sequences which retained the spatial features.Note that in contrast to the RT results in Figure 2C, the post-test (B) did not show a decrease of error rate for sequences with trained temporal, but new spatial features consistent with our previous behavioural findings (Kornysheva et al., 2013).DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.03043.005 Our study employed fMRI multivoxel pattern analysis that reflects the differential tuning of individual voxels (Kamitani and Tong, 2005; Kriegeskorte et al., 2006) to identify neural representations of spatial and temporal finger sequence features. We were able to dissociate independent feature representations in which voxel patterns related to spatial and temporal sequence features combined linearly, from integrated feature representations in which each spatio-temporal combination was associated with a unique activity pattern. We demonstrate that only the output stage of the cortical motor hierarchy, the primary motor cortex (M1) contralateral to the moving hand, encoded spatio-temporal features of finger sequences in an integrated fashion. In contrast, bilateral medial and lateral premotor cortices showed partly overlapping, but mutually independent representations of the spatial and temporal features. The independent encoding of sequence features in higher order motor areas paralleled our behavioural findings—the nervous system's ability to flexibly transfer both spatial and temporal features from trained to new sequence contexts. 32 neurologically healthy volunteers took part in this study (16 female), aged between 19 and 36 (mean: 24.8, SD: 5.6). Half of the subjects were trained and scanned on the right and half on the left hand (males and females balanced across groups). All subjects were right-handed according to the Edinburgh Inventory of Manual Preference (Oldfield, 1971) with a mean score of 89 (range: 70-100; SD: 11.9; both groups had the same mean score of 89, right group SD: 10.4, left group: SD 13.5). None of them were professional musicians or athletes. All subjects were naive concerning the hypothesis of this study. Experimental procedures were approved by the research ethics committee of University College London. Written informed consent was obtained from each participant for data analysis and publication of the study results.
Skilled performance is characterized by precise and flexible control of movement sequences in space and time. Recent theories suggest that integrated spatio-temporal trajectories are generated by intrinsic dynamics of motor and premotor networks. This contrasts with behavioural advantages that emerge when a trained spatial or temporal feature of sequences is transferred to a new spatio-temporal combination arguing for independent neural representations of these sequence features. We used a new fMRI pattern classification approach to identify brain regions with independent vs integrated representations. A distinct regional dissociation within motor areas was revealed: whereas only the contralateral primary motor cortex exhibited unique patterns for each spatio-temporal sequence combination, bilateral premotor areas represented spatial and temporal features independently of each other. These findings advocate a unique function of higher motor areas for flexible recombination and efficient encoding of complex motor behaviours.
Once a pianist has learned to play a song, he or she can nearly effortlessly reproduce the sequence of finger movements needed to play the song with a particular rhythm. A skilled pianist can also improvise, pairing the same keystrokes with a different rhythm or playing the same rhythm with a slightly different sequence of keys. This ability to flexibly modify and recombine sequences of physical movements in space and time enables humans to exhibit great creativity in music, language, and many other tasks that require motor skills. However, the underlying brain mechanisms that allow this flexibility are only beginning to be explored.