 Neuropathic pain—pain arising from damage to or dysfunction of the nervous system (Merskey and Bogduk, 1994)—is notoriously difficult to treat. Effective treatments have eluded discovery despite intense research and many promising leads (Woolf, 2010). Proposed explanations for the lack of clinical translation have focused on preclinical animal models (Rice et al., 2008; Mogil, 2009) and on clinical trial design (Dworkin et al., 2011; Mao, 2012). An alternative possibility is that degeneracy within the pain system allows the pathogenic process to circumvent single-target-drugs. If true, the single-target-drug paradigm is bound to fail no matter how good the animal models or clinical trials are, and a new paradigm is needed. According to our previous theoretical work, spike initiation occurs through a time- and voltage-dependent competition between net fast-activating inward current and net slower-activating outward current (Prescott et al., 2008). Because multiple types of ion channels contribute to each net current—currents with similar kinetics sum linearly (Kepler et al., 1992)—injury-induced changes in any one of the contributing ion channels can bias the competition (Rho and Prescott, 2012). Using a Morris-Lecar model that comprises only two variables whose interaction is sufficient to produce spikes, we adjusted parameters (‘Materials and methods’) to give a spike threshold approximating that observed in the soma of myelinated afferents, which is about −35 mV. The parameters of this base model were thereafter unchanged. Next, we derived the voltage-dependency and kinetics (Figure 1A) for an additional conductance (Equations 1-4 in ‘Materials and methods’) which, when added to our base model, modulates its spike initiation dynamics. This conductance corresponds to either a sodium or potassium channel depending on its associated reversal potential and, according to our analysis, must be active at subthreshold voltages. To be clear, the parameters for this conductance were chosen to modulate spike initiation dynamics, not to model specific ion channel types that are known to be altered by nerve injury. That said, although our determination of parameters was agnostic to molecular identities, parameter values resemble those of known channel types, as noted in subsequent sections. We then varied the maximal conductance of the additional conductance(s). Based on two-parameter bifurcation analysis, we determined the combinations of sodium conductance ḡNa and potassium conductance ḡK required to give repetitive spiking at different stimulus thresholds (Figure 1B). Somata of myelinated primary afferents normally generate a single spike at stimulus onset, which corresponds to the gray-shaded region, whereas a subset of those neurons spike repetitively after nerve injury (e.g., Liu et al., 2002), which corresponds to the colored region.10.7554/eLife.02370.003Figure 1.Modeling and theory.(A) Voltage-dependency and kinetics of subthreshold conductance. In bottom panel, τ = (α+β)−1 where α and β are defined in Equations 3 and 4. Equivalent activation parameters were used to implement either a sodium or potassium current based on reversal potential. (B) Two-parameter bifurcation analysis in which ḡNa and ḡK were co-varied to determine the ḡNa:ḡK ratio for a given threshold for repetitive spiking. Gray shading shows parameter regime associated with onset-only spiking. Changes in excitability are explained by a switch in spike initiation dynamics (Figure 1—figure supplement 1). (C) Predictions (indicated by numbered arrows) of how manipulating ḡNa and/or ḡK may force the system across a tipping point, thus reproducing or reversing neuropathic excitability. Position of the tipping point depends on many other parameters including leak conductance (D), voltage-dependency of ḡNa and ḡK (E), and potassium reversal potential (F).DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.02370.00310.7554/eLife.02370.004Figure 1—figure supplement 1.Spike initiation dynamics differ between normal and neuropathic conditions.In bifurcation analysis, a parameter such as stimulus intensity Istim is systematically varied to determine at what value the system qualitatively changes behavior, which is to say it undergoes a bifurcation. We repeated this analysis in a model with the ḡNa:ḡK ratio set to give normal excitability (ḡNa = 2.0 µS/cm2; ḡK = 2.5 µS/cm2) or neuropathic excitability (ḡNa = 2.5 µS/cm2; ḡK = 2.0 µS/cm2). Bifurcation diagrams (left) illustrate how the system behaves at different Istim: a stable fixed point corresponds to quiescence whereas a stable limit cycle corresponds to repetitive spiking. A subcritical Hopf bifurcation is evident in the bottom (Neuropathic) bifurcation diagram but not in the top (Normal) bifurcation diagram, suggesting that repetitive spiking is only possible in the former condition. In both conditions, the Istim range in which a single spike is produced at stimulus onset is indicated with gray shading. Onset-only spiking is achieved through a quasi-separatrix crossing, independent of any bifurcation. Dotted arrows indicate Istim values for sample traces on the right. Membrane potential oscillations (MPOs) occur when the fixed point is in proximity to a Hopf bifurcation; after being perturbed by noise, the system relaxes towards its nearly-unstable fixed point following a loose spiral trajectory, which corresponds to MPOs on the time series. In the absence of a Hopf bifurcation, the fixed point is more stable and MPOs are negligible. Repetitive spiking occurs when Istim exceeds the intensity required for the Hopf bifurcation. Repetitive spiking can also occur in the Istim range between the Hopf bifurcation and where the stable and unstable limit cycles meet (at a saddle-node bifurcation of limit cycles); that region also contains a stable fixed point, meaning that the system is bistable. The neuron will remain in one or the other stable state unless a slow process like adaptation sweeps the system across the bistable region, in which case the neuron will remain quiescent when sweeping rightward toward the Hopf bifurcation, while spiking repetitively when sweeping leftward toward the saddle-node bifurcation of limit cycles, thereby producing bursts as a consequence of hysteresis. Bistability and adaptation are both required for bursting.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.02370.004 Using computer simulations and experiments, we have demonstrated that primary afferent hyperexcitability associated with neuropathic pain arises through a switch in spike initiation dynamics that occurs when neurons cross a tipping point. Furthermore, there are many different ways to cross that tipping point. The first observation demonstrates criticality, whereas the latter demonstrates degeneracy. Criticality and degeneracy are both important concepts for understanding how complex systems normally operate and how they fail in disease states, but neither concept has been previously applied to help decipher the pathogenesis of neuropathic pain. We will discuss each concept in turn, and then address their relevance for understanding neuropathic pain. Starting with a two-dimensional Morris-Lecar (ML) model, which is sufficient to produce spikes, we added Hodgkin-Huxley (HH) style conductances for the express purpose of modulating spike initiation dynamics in the ML model. For ML equations, see Rho and Prescott (2012). Parameter values were as follows: C = 2 μF/cm2, ENa = 50 mV, EK = −100 mV, Eleak = −70 mV, φw = 0.15, ḡfast = 20 mS/cm2, ḡslow = 20 mS/cm2, gleak = 2 mS/cm2, βm = −1.2 mV, γm = 14 mV, βw = −10 mV, γw = 10 mV, and Istim was varied. HH conductances were modeled according to(1)INa,K=g¯Na,Km(V−ENa,K),(2)dmdt=α(1−m)−βm,(3)α=kα(V−Vαsα)e(V−Vαsα)−1,(4)β=kβe(V−Vβsβ),where, Vα,β = −24 mV, sα,β = −17 mV, and kα,β was between 1 and 1.5 ms−1. These parameters were chosen to give activation in the perithreshold voltage range (based on the threshold determined by ML parameters). In the interest of simplicity, the activation variable m was not raised to any exponent and nor was inactivation included. The Na+ and K+ currents differed only their reversal potential, where ENa = +50 mV and EK = −100 mV. Maximal conductances ḡNa and/or ḡK were varied in order to modulate spike initiation dynamics and thereby test our hypotheses. Where indicated, we also included a virtual slow AHP current modeled according to(5)IAHP=g¯AHPz(V−EK),(6)dzdt=(11+eβz−Vγz−z)/τz,where. βz = 0 mV, γz = 5 mV, τz = 300 ms. Setting βz to a suprathreshold voltage ensures a spike-dependent form of adaptation (Prescott and Sejnowski, 2008). Gaussian noise with standard deviation 0.3 μA/cm2 and 0 mean was also added, where indicated. Simulations were conducted in XPP and bifurcation analysis was conducted with AUTO using the XPP interface (Ermentrout, 2002).
Neuropathic pain remains notoriously difficult to treat despite numerous drug targets. Here, we offer a novel explanation for this intractability. Computer simulations predicted that qualitative changes in primary afferent excitability linked to neuropathic pain arise through a switch in spike initiation dynamics when molecular pathologies reach a tipping point (criticality), and that this tipping point can be reached via several different molecular pathologies (degeneracy). We experimentally tested these predictions by pharmacologically blocking native conductances and/or electrophysiologically inserting virtual conductances. Multiple different manipulations successfully reproduced or reversed neuropathic changes in primary afferents from naïve or nerve-injured rats, respectively, thus confirming the predicted criticality and its degenerate basis. Degeneracy means that several different molecular pathologies are individually sufficient to cause hyperexcitability, and because several such pathologies co-occur after nerve injury, that no single pathology is uniquely necessary. Consequently, single-target-drugs can be circumvented by maladaptive plasticity in any one of several ion channels.
Although the pain associated with an injury is unpleasant, it normally serves an important purpose: to make you avoid its source. However, some pain appears to arise from nowhere. Frustratingly, this type of pain, known as neuropathic pain, does not respond to common painkillers and is thus very difficult to treat.