 The prefrontal cortex (PFC) plays an important role in adaptive behavior such as associative learning (Duncan, 2001). Dopaminergic input from the ventral tegmental area (VTA) is crucial for PFC function (Schultz, 2007). In primates, sensory cues, which are used in associative learning tasks, create specific temporal activity patterns in PFC neurons and a neural representation of the sensory cue (Jacob et al., 2013). However, how dopamine contributes to form neural representations at the neuronal network level is largely unknown. One potential mechanism is that dopaminergic (DA) neurons target dopamine over a number of inhibitory and excitatory neurons via their widespread axonal arborizations (Matsuda et al., 2009). Thus, investigating modification of neuronal activity at the population level will reveal the role of dopamine signaling in the formation of neural representation. Therefore, utilizing in vivo two-photon Ca2+ imaging in awake mice, this study investigated how neural representation in PFC neurons is developed under regulation by dopamine, in response to visual sensory input. PFC neuronal activity was recorded through a cranial window at the secondary motor cortex (M2). The M2 is categorized as the dorsomedial PFC in rodents in some publications, based on both its anatomical features, including thalamocortical and cortical-basal ganglia connections, and its functional role in motor decision (Sul et al., 2011; Uylings et al., 2003; Hoover and Vertes, 2007). The M2 receives inputs from both the VTA and the secondary visual cortex lateral area (V2L) (Figure 1A,B). Microelectrodes were implanted in these two brain areas to supply electrical stimulation (Figure 1C,D).10.7554/eLife.02726.003Figure 1.Ca2+ imaging setup and calcium transients in response to VTA stimulation with and without anesthesia.(A) Retrograde tracing. Fluorogold was injected into the prefrontal cortex (PFC). Cells in the secondary visual cortex lateral area (V2L) were labeled. Scale bar, 250 μm. (B) Anterograde tracing. FITC-dextran was injected into the V2L. Labeled fibers were observed in the PFC. Scale bar, 100 μm. (C) Experimental setup for calcium imaging. A cranial window was opened over M2 (PFC). Two electrodes were implanted in the ventral tegmental area (VTA) and the V2L. (D) Two-photon image of calcium indicator (OGB-1)-labeled layer 2/3 cells in M2 (neurons, green; sulforhodamine-101 counterstained astrocytes, red to orange). Approximately 50-80 cells were analyzed in each animal. Scale bar, 30 μm. (E) The Ca2+ transients evoked in an awake animal and in an animal under anesthesia. Population average of Ca2+ transients (dF/F) in response to 10 pulses at 50 Hz VTA stimulation (n = 4 animals). VTA electrical stimulation was applied at the 30 s time point (red arrowhead). In contrast to a clear response in awake mice (left), the long-lasting Ca2+ transients were not detected in mice under anesthesia (right, 4% isoflurane). The same animals were used for the ‘Awake’ and ‘Under anesthesia’ experiments. (F) The effect of isoflurane on Ca2+ transients. The summed values of Ca2+ transients from the 30 to 50 s time points were compared with the ‘Awake’ value (changing ratio). Paired t test, *p < 0.05. Error bars represent SEM.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.02726.003 Neuronal retrograde tracer Fluorogold (4%; Fluorochrome, Denver, CO) or FITC-conjugated dextran (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA) were injected into the M2 or V2L, respectively, and 48 hr later, mice were fixed with 4% formalin in phosphate buffer. Brains were sliced using a vibratome and Fluorogold or FITC was identified by using fluorescence microscopy.
Dopamine is critical for higher neural processes and modifying the activity of the prefrontal cortex (PFC). However, the mechanism of dopamine contribution to the modification of neural representation is unclear. Using in vivo two-photon population Ca2+ imaging in awake mice, this study investigated how neural representation of visual input to PFC neurons is regulated by dopamine. Phasic stimulation of dopaminergic neurons in the ventral tegmental area (VTA) evoked prolonged Ca2+ transients, lasting ∼30 s in layer 2/3 neurons of the PFC, which are regulated by a dopamine D1 receptor-dependent pathway. Furthermore, only a conditioning protocol with visual sensory input applied 0.5 s before the VTA dopaminergic input could evoke enhanced Ca2+ transients and increased pattern similarity (or establish a neural representation) of PFC neurons to the same sensory input. By increasing both the level of neuronal response and pattern similarity, dopaminergic input may establish robust and reliable cortical representation.
Around 120 years ago, Ivan Pavlov unintentionally sparked a new field of psychology research. He did so by noting that his dogs had learned to associate the sound of the bell that he rang before feeding them with the food itself, such that they would salivate upon hearing the bell even when there was no food present. This form of learning—now known as associative learning—has since been demonstrated in species from honeybees to humans.