 The orbitofrontal cortex (OFC) is often described as signaling either an outcome expectancy, implying a knowledge of the features of the impending outcome (Schoenbaum et al., 1998; Delamater, 2007; Ostlund and Balleine, 2007; Steiner and Redish, 2012; Luk and Wallis, 2013), or a value that exists independent of those features (Padoa-Schioppa, 2011; Levy and Glimcher, 2012). Support for such pure or abstract value encoding comes largely from reports that single unit activity and the blood-oxygen level dependent (BOLD) response in the OFC tracks value, independent of outcome features such as identity or location or even the response required to obtain the outcome (Padoa-Schioppa and Assad, 2006; Plassmann et al., 2007; Levy and Glimcher, 2011). We recorded single-unit activity in the OFC in six rats during an odor-based unblocking task (Figure 1A). Prior to implantation with electrodes rats were trained to sample an odor in a central port following house light illumination and then respond to a reward well below for two drops of Nestlé's flavored milk (chocolate or vanilla, counterbalanced). This training was meant to establish the initial odor as a reliable predictor of a specific flavor and number of drops of milk. Each rat had extensive experience with both flavors, thus neither flavor was novel. Following initial training rats were implanted with microelectrodes in the OFC. When recovered from surgery, rats were retrained on the initial odor; after retraining, each rat underwent 7-9 rounds of unblocking.10.7554/eLife.02653.003Figure 1.Experimental outline, behavior summary and recording sites.(A) Thirsty rats were initially trained to enter an odor port following illumination of a house light and respond at reward well below for two drops of flavored milk. Unblocking sessions consisted of four trial types. The first was a reminder of initial training. On the remaining three trial types, the originally trained odor was briefly presented followed by 1 of 3 novel odors. The reward following the novel odors was either unchanged (black; blocked trials), increased in number (blue; number trials), or its flavor was altered (green; flavor trials). Learning was assessed in a probe test in which the novel odors were presented in isolation, without reward. (B) 10-min consumption testing between chocolate and water, and vanilla and water on non-training days found that both were significantly and equally preferred to water (ANOVA, F1,5 > 5, p's < 0.05). (C) 2-min preference testing between chocolate and vanilla immediately following unblocking sessions found no flavor preference (t test, p > 0.1). Scatter plot (right) shows preference for the trained flavor on each individual test (n = 13). (D) 20-min consumption testing from a separate group of rats (n = 8) that received selective devaluation of one of the flavors found a significant difference in consumption between the non-devalued (Con) and devalued (Dev) flavors (t test, p < 0.01). This was true for every rat tested (right). (E) Time in the reward well is plotted for the probe test trials. ANOVA for time spent in the reward well with odor (blocked, number and flavor) and trial (1-15) as factors found a significant odor x trial interaction (F1,47 = 3.45, p < 0.05). Planned comparisons confirmed that on the first three trials rats spent significantly more time in the reward well following number and flavor odors compared to blocked (p's < 0.05) but responding to number and flavor did not differ (p > 0.1). (F) Single unit activity was recorded from the lateral orbital and agranular insular cortices at roughly 3.2 mm anterior to bregma. *p < 0.05; ns = not significant.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.02653.00310.7554/eLife.02653.004Figure 1—figure supplement 1.Selective conditioned flavor aversion preference data.Preference for the devalued milk flavor (devalued)/(devalued +non-devalued) is shown for the 2 days of pre-exposure (P1-2), the 5 days of conditioning (C1-5, red background) and the final choice test (T). A value of 0.5 indicates equal preference while a value of 0.0 indicates an aversion to the devalued flavor. ANOVA for consumption over the 5 days of conditioning with session, flavor (choc vs van) and treatment (control vs devalue) found a significant session × treatment interaction (F4,28 = 10.91, p < 0.05) but no effect of or interaction with flavor. Asterisks indicate significance of a one-sample t test comparing % Devalue Preference to 0.5.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.02653.004 Neural signals in the OFC are often described as representing either outcome expectancies or abstract value. Although many studies have argued for one or the other, few have used behavioral designs that clearly dissociate predictions of these two hypotheses. Here we tried to address this question by using an unblocking procedure to strip away or ‘block’ the abstract value of the outcome during learning, while leaving unblocked—free to enter into associations—the outcome's sensory and other unique features. This approach revealed two distinct populations of OFC neurons. Male Long-Evans rats were obtained at 200-250 g from Charles River Labs, (Wilmington, MA). Rats were tested at the University of Maryland School of Medicine and the NIDA-IRP in accordance with SOM and NIH guidelines (12-CNRB-108).
The orbitofrontal cortex (OFC) has been described as signaling outcome expectancies or value. Evidence for the latter comes from the studies showing that neural signals in the OFC correlate with value across features. Yet features can co-vary with value, and individual units may participate in multiple ensembles coding different features. Here we used unblocking to test whether OFC neurons would respond to a predictive cue signaling a ‘valueless’ change in outcome flavor. Neurons were recorded as the rats learned about cues that signaled either an increase in reward number or a valueless change in flavor. We found that OFC neurons acquired responses to both predictive cues. This activity exceeded that exhibited to a ‘blocked’ cue and was correlated with activity to the actual outcome. These results show that OFC neurons fire to cues with no value independent of what can be inferred through features of the predicted outcome.
Imagine you are at a restaurant and the waiter offers you a choice of cheesecake or fruit salad for dessert. When making your choice it is likely that you will consider the features of these desserts, such as their taste, their sweetness or how healthy they are. However, when you decide which dessert to have, you will pick the one that you judge to have the highest value for you at that moment in time. In this sense, ‘value’ is a subjective concept that varies from person to person, while ‘features’ remain relatively static.