 The climbing fiber (CF) input to Purkinje cells (PCs) plays a key role in theories of cerebellar learning (Houk et al., 1996; Ito, 2000) by providing a teaching signal that sounds the alarm when an unexpected sensory event is encountered (Simpson et al., 1996; De Zeeuw et al., 1998; Ito, 2013). Support for this hypothesis comes from studies of Pavlovian eyeblink conditioning (Medina et al., 2000), a simple associative task in which subjects learn to blink to an initially neutral cue if it is repeatedly paired with a blink-eliciting instructive stimulus, such as a periocular airpuff. Previous work has shown that some CFs fire a burst of spikes when the unexpected periocular airpuff is delivered (Sears and Steinmetz, 1991; Nicholson and Freeman, 2003), and that this signal is sufficient for conditioning (Mauk et al., 1986; Thompson et al., 1998). All of these studies indicate that CFs are an important source of instructive signals to the cerebellum. However, we do not understand how CF signals encode even the most basic stimulus features such as the strength of the periocular airpuff, which has a major impact on the magnitude and the rate of learning (Spence, 1953; Smith, 1968). We used a two-photon microscope to image calcium signals triggered by sensory-driven activation of climbing fiber (CF) inputs to Purkinje cell (PC) dendrites of awake mice. Mice were head-fixed on top of a freely rotating cylindrical treadmill and allowed to locomote in place while we delivered airpuffs of varying pressures and durations to the periocular area. In some experiments we used airpuffs of four different durations (12 experiments, 4 mice, 97 dendrites; durations: 8, 15, 30, 45 ms; pressure: 30 psi); in other experiments we used airpuffs of two different pressures (6 experiments, 3 mice, 39 dendrites; pressures 10, 50 psi; duration: 30 ms). We will refer to these two datasets as duration and pressure data, respectively. Our results demonstrate that climbing fibers (CFs) represent information about the strength of a periocular airpuff in a number of ways, both at the individual-CF and population level. Consistent with previous reports of CF activity in awake animals (Gibson et al., 2004), we found no evidence for rate coding in our experiments: each presentation of the periocular airpuff resulted in either zero or one calcium event in the Purkinje cell (PC) dendrite, which would indicate that the pre-synaptic CF was activated at most once in virtually all trials (multiple activation in <2% of all trials). In the absence of a rate code, our results indicate that analog information about airpuff strength was encoded in: (1) the probability and latency distribution of individual CF inputs across repeated stimulus presentations, (2) the amplitude of the stimulus-evoked calcium event in individual PC dendrites, and (3) the level of co-activation of the CF population. Experimental procedures were approved by the Princeton University Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee and performed in accordance with the animal welfare guidelines of the National Institutes of Health. The details of the animal preparation have been described previously (Najafi et al., 2014). Briefly, C57BL/6J mice (female, 8-14 weeks) were deeply anesthetized by inhalation of isoflurane (3-5% induction; 0.5-1.5% maintenance). A small area of the cerebellum was exposed (diameter: 3 mm), and a Kwik-Sil plug, pre-molded on a coverslip, was secured over the dura using a two-piece, stainless steel headplate. Throughout the surgery, sterile saline was used to keep the dura wet. Animals’ body temperature was monitored and maintained near 37°C. Analgesics (Meloxicam, 5 mg/kg, subcutaneous) were injected. At the end of the surgery, anesthesia was removed and mice were returned to their cage for recovery.
The climbing fiber input to Purkinje cells acts as a teaching signal by triggering a massive influx of dendritic calcium that marks the occurrence of instructive stimuli during cerebellar learning. Here, we challenge the view that these calcium spikes are all-or-none and only signal whether the instructive stimulus has occurred, without providing parametric information about its features. We imaged ensembles of Purkinje cell dendrites in awake mice and measured their calcium responses to periocular airpuffs that serve as instructive stimuli during cerebellar-dependent eyeblink conditioning. Information about airpuff duration and pressure was encoded probabilistically across repeated trials, and in two additional signals in single trials: the synchrony of calcium spikes in the Purkinje cell population, and the amplitude of the calcium spikes, which was modulated by a non-climbing fiber pathway. These results indicate that calcium-based teaching signals in Purkinje cells contain analog information that encodes the strength of instructive stimuli trial-by-trial.
A region of the brain known as the cerebellum plays a key role in learning how to anticipate an event. For example, if you know that a puff of air is going to be directed at your eye, it's a good idea to close it in advance. However, how much you need to close it depends on how strong that puff of air is. A very strong puff might require closing the eye completely to protect it. In contrast, it is probably better to only partially close the eye if you know a lighter puff of air is coming, so that you can still see.