 Dscam levels are increased in the brains of human patients with DS and in mouse models of DS (Saito et al., 2000; Alves-Sampaio et al., 2010). Recent research also suggests that fragile X mental retardation protein (FMRP) binds directly to the mRNAs of Dscam from mouse brain (Brown et al., 2001; Darnell et al., 2011), and studies in Drosophila neurons further confirmed that FMRP suppresses Dscam translation (Cvetkovska et al., 2013; Kim et al., 2013). In the dendritic arborization (da) neurons in Drosophila larva, Dscam expression level is instructive for presynaptic terminal growth (Kim et al., 2013). Consistent with this, increased Dscam in Drosophila FXS models results in enlarged presynaptic arbors (Kim et al., 2013). These findings indicate the importance of proper Dscam levels in normal development and in the pathogenesis of brain disorders. We took advantage of the Drosophila larval class IV dendritic arborization (C4da) neurons to delineate the molecular mechanism of Dscam signaling in presynaptic arbor development, because the presynaptic terminal growth of these neurons is highly sensitive to Dscam levels in a linear fashion (Kim et al., 2013). For example, loss of Dscam causes C4da presynaptic terminals to fail to grow while increased Dscam levels lead to increased presynaptic terminal growth (Kim et al., 2013). From tests of candidate genes that potentially mediate Dscam function, including FAK, Fyn, PAK, RhoA, and Abl, we identified Abl as a key molecule mediating Dscam's functions in presynaptic terminal growth. We first asked whether Abl is sufficient to promote presynaptic terminal growth in C4da neurons. Consistent with a previous study performed in Drosophila adult CNS neurons (Leyssen et al., 2005), overexpression of Abl in C4da neurons caused significant overgrowth of the presynaptic terminals (Figure 1A,B,E). Since Abl is known to have both kinase-dependent and kinase-independent functions (Henkemeyer et al., 1990; Schwartzberg et al., 1991; Tybulewicz et al., 1991), we tested whether expression of a kinase-dead form of Abl, Abl-K417N (Henkemeyer et al., 1990; Wills et al., 1999b), could promote presynaptic terminal growth. We found that C4da presynaptic terminals overexpressing Abl-K417N were indistinguishable from wild-type (Figure 1D,E), indicating that Abl kinase activity is required. Consistent with the idea that Abl kinase activation is important, expression of a constitutively active form of Abl, BCR-Abl, led to extremely exuberant overgrowth (Figure 1C,E). Taken together, these results suggest that Abl is sufficient to promote presynaptic terminal growth and that the extent to which Abl instructs presynaptic terminal growth is related to Abl kinase activation.10.7554/eLife.05196.003Figure 1.Dscam requires Abl to promote presynaptic terminal growth.(A-E) Abl is sufficient to cause presynaptic terminal overgrowth in C4da neurons. Transgenes were expressed with a C4da neuron-specific Gal4 driver, ppk-Gal4, and presynaptic terminals were visualized with a membrane monomeric RFP (mCD8-mRFP) transgene. Overexpression of Abl (B) leads to a modest increase in presynaptic terminal growth as compared to control (A). Overexpression of the constitutively active BCR-Abl (C) leads to robustly increased presynaptic terminal growth, while overexpression of kinase-dead Abl-K417N (D) is indistinguishable from control. Quantification of the number of axon connectives is shown in (E). Scale bar is 10 μm. (F-K) Abl is required in C4da neurons for Dscam to instruct presynaptic terminal growth. The arrowhead in each panel points to the location where an axon elaborates the presynaptic terminal arbor. The MARCM technique was used to generate and visualize single mutant C4da neurons. While overexpression of Dscam::GFP (G) in single C4da presynaptic terminals leads to increased length when compared to control (F), overexpression of Dscam in abl1 mutant neurons (H) leads to presynaptic terminal lengths that are indistinguishable from abl1 mutant neurons (I). Similarly, overexpression of Dscam in abl4 mutant neurons (J) does not significantly change presynaptic terminal length when compared to abl4 mutant neurons (K). (L-N) Abl is required to instruct presynaptic terminal growth in dFMRP mutants. (M) Loss of dFMRP leads to increased presynaptic terminal growth, which has previously been shown to require Dscam. Loss of one copy of abl in dFMRPΔ50M mutant neurons (N) leads to presynaptic terminal lengths that are indistinguishable from control (L). Scale bar is 10 μm. (O and P) Quantification of the presynaptic terminal length in C4da neurons of indicated genotypes. Sample number is shown in white within each bar.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.05196.00310.7554/eLife.05196.004Figure 1—figure supplement 1.Loss of abl does not affect Dscam::GFP expression level.(A and B) Loss of abl does not affect Dscam::GFP expression in C4da cell bodies. (A) Example images of C4da neuron cell bodies (white arrowheads) in control (left) or abl1 homozygous mutant (right) animals. Upper images show merged signals of mCD8::mRFP and Dscam::GFP, while lower images show Dscam::GFP alone. Scale bar is 10 µm. (B) Quantification of the relative intensity of Dscam::GFP fluorescence normalized to mCD8::mRFP. Sample number is shown inside each bar. (C and D) Loss of abl does not affect Dscam::GFP expression in C4da presynaptic terminals. The MARCM technique was used to generate and visualize single mutant C4da neurons. (C) Example images of C4da presynaptic terminals in control (left) and abl1 mutant clones. Upper images show merged signals of mCD8::mRFP and Dscam::GFP, lower images show Dscam::GFP alone. Scale bar is 10 µm. (D) Quantification of the relative intensity of Dscam::GFP normalized to mCD8::mRFP. Sample number is shown inside each bar.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.05196.00410.7554/eLife.05196.005Figure 1—figure supplement 2.Loss of abl does not affect C4da dendritic length or morphology.Representative images of control (A) and abl1 mutant C4da neuron clones (B). The average total dendritic length is not significantly different between these two conditions (C). Scale bar is 50 µm.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.05196.00510.7554/eLife.05196.006Figure 1—figure supplement 3.Single Dscam isoform-induced ectopic repulsion between class I and class III dendrites does not require abl.The dendritic field of the class I da neuron vpda (traced in magenta) normally overlaps extensively with that of the class III da neuron v'pda (traced in cyan) (A). When a transgene expressing a single Dscam isoform is overexpressed in both neurons, their dendritic fields segregate (B), exhibiting an ectopic repulsion. The expression of the same Dscam transgene in abl1 neurons also leads to ectopic repulsion (C). Original background images show the pan-neuronal marker labeled with anti-horseradish-peroxidase antibody (red) and Dscam::GFP transgene expression (green). (D) Quantification of the number of dendritic branch crossing. Sample number is shown in white inside each bar. Scale bar is 25 µm.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.05196.006 abl1 (Gertler et al., 1989), abl4 (Bennett and Hoffmann, 1992), ppk-Gal4 (Kuo et al., 2005), UAS-Dscam[3.36.25.2]::GFP (Yu et al., 2009), UAS-Abl, UAS-BCR-Abl, UAS-Abl-K417N (Wills et al., 1999b), and dFMRPΔ50M (Zhang et al., 2001) were used in this study.
Increased expression of Down Syndrome Cell Adhesion Molecule (Dscam) is implicated in the pathogenesis of brain disorders such as Down syndrome (DS) and fragile X syndrome (FXS). Here, we show that the cellular defects caused by dysregulated Dscam levels can be ameliorated by genetic and pharmacological inhibition of Abelson kinase (Abl) both in Dscam-overexpressing neurons and in a Drosophila model of fragile X syndrome. This study offers Abl as a potential therapeutic target for treating brain disorders associated with dysregulated Dscam expression.
Information is transmitted through the brain by cells called neurons, which are connected into specific circuits and networks. As the brain develops, several different signaling molecules control how the connections between neurons develop. If these signals occur at the wrong time or wrong place, or in the wrong amount, the neurons may not connect in the right way; this is the cause of several brain disorders.