 The cerebellum is thought to implement a supervised learning algorithm, with the climbing fiber input to the cerebellum providing error signals that induce learning. According to this model, performance errors activate neurons in the inferior olive and their climbing fiber axons, which in turn trigger the induction of plasticity in the cerebellar cortex to produce adaptive changes in behavior (Marr, 1969; Albus, 1971). Previous work has shown that this process is regulated by a feedback loop from the cerebellar cortex to the inferior olive (Andersson and Armstrong, 1987; Hesslow and Ivarsson, 1994; Medina et al., 2002; Rasmussen et al., 2008; Yang and Lisberger, 2013; reviewed in Apps, 1999; Gibson et al., 2002). In this study, we describe a second level of regulation in animals undergoing learning: even when climbing fibers are robustly activated by performance errors, the ability of that climbing fiber activity to trigger plasticity can be regulated by the state of the cerebellar circuit. Thus, the cerebellum is not a slave to its climbing fiber ‘teachers’, but rather plays an active role in determining whether it will adapt in response to the error signals it receives from the climbing fibers. We recorded from Purkinje cells in the floccular complex of two adult rhesus monkeys during VOR-increase and VOR-decrease training. An extracellular recording from a Purkinje cell provides simultaneous access to two distinct physiological signals: complex spikes, which provide a one-to-one readout of spikes in the single climbing fiber innervating the Purkinje cell (Eccles et al., 1966); and simple spikes, which reflect the impact of all excitatory and inhibitory inputs as well as the intrinsic excitability of the Purkinje cell (Figure 1). Both our recording and stimulation results indicate that during VOR learning, the efficacy of the climbing fibers for inducing plasticity is gated downstream of their encoding of errors. The unusually powerful synaptic connections between the climbing fibers and Purkinje cells have generally been viewed as providing a reliable and potent trigger for plasticity. In contrast, a comparison of the positive and negative results from the two VOR learning paradigms indicates that the coupling between climbing fiber activity and the induction of plasticity is regulated, and can vary across different learning contexts. During experiments, monkeys were restrained in a primate chair with their head fixed to the chair via a surgically implanted head post. Horizontal eye position (relative to the head) was measured using the eye coil method (Robinson, 1963) and differentiated to obtain a record of eye velocity. Vestibular stimuli were delivered by rotating the primate chair and animal about an earth-vertical axis using a turntable controlled by a velocity servo motor (Carco Electronics). The vestibular stimulus was a 250-ms, 500-ms, or 1000-ms pulse of head velocity at 15°/s (25 ms of acceleration). The servo motor had a small overshoot at the end of the acceleration and deceleration (Figure 2A,B). Rightward and leftward vestibular stimuli were delivered in alternation, with a fixed interval of 2.192 s between vestibular stimuli in a given direction.
Cerebellar climbing fiber activity encodes performance errors during many motor learning tasks, but the role of these error signals in learning has been controversial. We compared two motor learning paradigms that elicited equally robust putative error signals in the same climbing fibers: learned increases and decreases in the gain of the vestibulo-ocular reflex (VOR). During VOR-increase training, climbing fiber activity on one trial predicted changes in cerebellar output on the next trial, and optogenetic activation of climbing fibers to mimic their encoding of performance errors was sufficient to implant a motor memory. In contrast, during VOR-decrease training, there was no trial-by-trial correlation between climbing fiber activity and changes in cerebellar output, and climbing fiber activation did not induce VOR-decrease learning. Our data suggest that the ability of climbing fibers to induce plasticity can be dynamically gated in vivo, even under conditions where climbing fibers are robustly activated by performance errors.
The cerebellum (or ‘little brain’) is located underneath the cerebral hemispheres. Despite comprising around 10% of the brain’s volume, the cerebellum contains roughly half of the brain’s neurons. Many of the functions of the cerebellum are related to the control and fine-tuning of movement, and people whose cerebellum has been damaged have problems with balance and coordination, and with learning new motor skills.