 A third of adults over the age of 65 suffer from significant hearing loss, a condition exacerbated by two debilitating condition, subjective tinnitus, a phantom ringing or buzzing sensation, and hyperacusis, normal sounds perceived as intolerably loud or even painful. Roughly 12% of adults experience tinnitus, but the prevalence skyrockets to 50% in young combat personnel (Leske, 1981; Andersson et al., 2002; Cave et al., 2007; Michikawa et al., 2010; Hebert et al., 2013). Tinnitus is costly with more than $2 billion paid annually in veteran disability payments. Hyperacusis affects roughly 9% of adults (Andersson et al., 2002), but its prevalence is likely higher because of the difficulty of self-diagnosis (Gu et al., 2010). Remarkably, among those whose primary complaint is hyperacusis, 90% also suffer from tinnitus (Baguley, 2003). Since tinnitus and hyperacusis are often triggered by cochlear hearing loss, it was long assumed that these auditory distortions resulted from hyperactivity disorders in the peripheral auditory nerve. This hypothesis, however, is contradicted by studies showing that auditory nerve spontaneous and sound-evoked firing rates are depressed in subjects with cochlear damage (Kiang et al., 1970; Wang et al., 1997). Moreover, surgical section of the auditory nerve fails to eliminate tinnitus (Baguley et al., 1992; Lockwood et al., 2001). These negative results plus recent imaging studies now suggest that tinnitus and hyperacusis arise from maladaptive neuroplastic change in the central nervous system (CNS) provoked by cochlear pathology (Lockwood et al., 1998; Husain et al., 2011; Sereda et al., 2011). Three complimentary experiments involving behavioral, electrophysiological, and functional imaging were conducted in separate groups of rats. In Experiment 1, three behavioral studies were performed on separate groups of rats to assess SS-induced tinnitus, hyperacusis, and startle reflex hyperactivity. In Experiment 2, electrophysiological measurements were carried out on a separate group of rats to determine how SS altered the neural input/output functions in cochlea, as reflected in the compound action potential (CAP) from the auditory nerve, and the local field potentials (LFP) recorded in the MGB, ACx, and lateral amygdala (LA). In Experiment 3, resting-state fMRI studies were conducted in another group of rats to determine how SS altered the ALFF and FC patterns obtained with seeds placed in ACx, MGB, and IC. SS induced a peripheral threshold shift of approximately 20 dB for the CAP (Figure 2A) (Chen et al., 2013, 2014). The same amount of threshold shift occurred at higher levels of the auditory pathway indicating that the SS-induced hearing loss originates in the cochlea and is relayed centrally. SS also reduced the CAP neural output by ∼70% at suprathreshold intensities. Paradoxically, suprathreshold LFP amplitudes in the MGB, ACx, and LA were larger than normal despite the massive reduction in the output of the cochlea (Figure 2B-D). These provocative findings provide compelling evidence for an increase in central gain, a form of homeostatic plasticity implicated in tinnitus and hyperacusis (Salvi et al., 1990; Auerbach et al., 2014). The enhanced LFPs seen in ACx are consistent with the enhanced fMRI response observed in the ACx of tinnitus patients, whereas the enhanced LFPs seen in both ACx and MGB are consistent with the enhanced fMRI responses observed these regions in hyperacusis patients (Gu et al., 2010). These results are consistent with previous models and data linking tinnitus and loudness intolerance to increased central gain in the central auditory pathway in particular regions from the IC to ACx (Salvi et al., 1990; Qiu et al., 2000; Auerbach et al., 2014). In some models, enhanced central gain amplifies central neural noise resulting in tinnitus (Noreña, 2010). However, in other models, central neural noise increases independent of central gain (Zeng, 2013); this could potentially explain why some patients only experience tinnitus, but not hyperacusis (Baguley, 2003). However, this distinction is clouded by the fact that many tinnitus patients are unaware of their mild hyperacusis, that is, hyperacusis may be more prevalent in tinnitus patients than currently believed because many patients are unaware of their hyperacusis (Gu et al., 2010). Behavioral Experiment 1 and electrophysiological Experiment 2 were approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at the University at Buffalo, Buffalo, NY, USA in accordance with NIH guidelines. The fMRI studies in Experiment 3 were conducted in accordance with the National Institutes of Health Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals and approved by the Animal Care Committee of Southeast University, Nanjing, China.
Hearing loss often triggers an inescapable buzz (tinnitus) and causes everyday sounds to become intolerably loud (hyperacusis), but exactly where and how this occurs in the brain is unknown. To identify the neural substrate for these debilitating disorders, we induced both tinnitus and hyperacusis with an ototoxic drug (salicylate) and used behavioral, electrophysiological, and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) techniques to identify the tinnitus-hyperacusis network. Salicylate depressed the neural output of the cochlea, but vigorously amplified sound-evoked neural responses in the amygdala, medial geniculate, and auditory cortex. Resting-state fMRI revealed hyperactivity in an auditory network composed of inferior colliculus, medial geniculate, and auditory cortex with side branches to cerebellum, amygdala, and reticular formation. Functional connectivity revealed enhanced coupling within the auditory network and segments of the auditory network and cerebellum, reticular formation, amygdala, and hippocampus. A testable model accounting for distress, arousal, and gating of tinnitus and hyperacusis is proposed.
One in three adults over the age of 65 will experience a significant loss of hearing. This is often worsened by related conditions, such as: tinnitus, an unexplained constant buzzing or ringing sound; and hyperacusis, whereby everyday sounds are perceived as too loud or painful.