 Depriving one eye of normal patterned vision during early life causes a loss of visual acuity (amblyopia) and neurons in the visual cortex lose responsiveness through the deprived eye. If such abnormal vision is left uncorrected, recovery of visual function in adulthood is slow and incomplete, both in humans and in higher mammals, reflecting the limited plasticity of mature cortex (Hubel and Wiesel, 1970; Mitchell and Sengpiel, 2009). The recent discovery that neurons in mouse visual cortex respond with more than two times the number of action potentials during active locomotion than when still (Niell and Stryker, 2010) led us to test whether this enhanced response might facilitate recovery from the effects of early-onset, long-term monocular visual deprivation (MD). Monocular deprivation was initiated by suturing shut the right eyelid of C57BL/6 mice early in the critical period (P22-24) and was continued to 4 to 5 months of age. The right eye was then re-opened to allow for binocular vision (BV), and baseline cortical responses through the two eyes were recorded using intrinsic signal imaging. Both eyes remained open afterward, and changes in responsiveness were measured over the next 3 weeks (Figure 1A). For 4 hr each day during these 21 days of BV (21d-BV), experimental animals viewed a visual stimulus (VS) while being permitted to run on a freely rotating spherical treadmill with their heads fixed. We used contrast-modulated stochastic noise matched to the spatiotemporal frequency response of the mouse as the visual stimulus because it drives nearly all cells in the primary visual cortex to some extent (Niell and Stryker, 2008).10.7554/eLife.02798.003Figure 1.Visual stimulation during locomotion enhances recovery of cortical responses through the deprived eye after prolonged MD.(A) Experimental schedule to examine changes in visual cortical responses over 21d-BV following prolonged MD started at postnatal day (P) 22-24. (B and C) Examples of intrinsic signal responses to the closed eye in the binocular visual cortex during 21d-BV in a home-cage control mouse (B) and in a mouse viewing contrast-modulated noise as VS during daily runs (VS+run, C). (D and E) Changes in intrinsic signal responses evoked by the noise through the closed (D) and open (E) eyes in home-cage (n = 8) and VS+run mice (n = 8). (F) Ocular dominance index (ODI) computed from response amplitude to contralateral (closed) and ipsilateral (open) eyes shown in D and E. ODI represents normalized difference in response magnitude between two eyes with 0 being equal amplitude to two eyes; the higher the number, more contralateral eye dominant. (G and H) Changes in intrinsic signal responses evoked by the noise through the closed (G) and open (H) eyes in run-only (n = 7) and VS-only mice (n = 7). (I) Ocular dominance index (ODI) computed from response amplitude to contralateral (closed) and ipsilateral (open) eyes shown in G and H. Gray area in D-I indicates the range of response amplitude or ODI in age-matched mice with normal visual experience. **p<0.01, *p<0.05, between groups.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.02798.00310.7554/eLife.02798.004Figure 1—figure supplement 1.Effects of visual stimulation during locomotion after 4 days of binocular vision.(A) Intrinsic signal responses to the noise through the deprived eye (solid circle) and open eye (open circle) in the binocular visual cortex on day 0 (before re-opening the deprived eye) and day 4 in the same individuals. Note that the animals experienced the contrast-modulated noise as VS during running daily for 4 hr on day 1, 2, and 3. (B) Ocular dominance index calculated from data shown in A. *p<0.01 compared to day 0, paired t test. n = 6.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.02798.00410.7554/eLife.02798.005Figure 1—figure supplement 2.Changes in responses during reverse occlusion measured using intrinsic signal imaging.(A) Responses to the contrast-modulated noise movie (noise) through the deprived eye in the binocular visual cortex in mice that were presented the noise as VS during daily running (VS+run: open red diamonds, n = 5) and in mice kept in the regular housing condition without VS or running (home-cage: open graygray diamonds, n = 5). (B) Responses to the contrast-modulated noise movie (noise) through the previously-open, newly-closed eye in the binocular visual cortex in VS+run mice (open red diamonds) and in home-cage mice (open graygray diamonds). (C) Ocular dominance index computed from data presented in A and B. For A-C, closed symbols indicate group average. **p<0.01, *p<0.05 between groups.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.02798.00510.7554/eLife.02798.006Figure 1—figure supplement 3.Monitoring of locomotion while the mice are on the track-ball.(A) Percent of time during which individual animals were moving (>1 cm/s, as opposed to standing stationary) on the spherical treadmill. (B) Relationship between the change in response amplitude measured by intrinsic signal imaging and average moving time for day 1 through 6 (open circles) and day 1 through 13 (closed circles) in individual animals. Points from the same animals are connected by lines. (C) Average moving velocity of individual animals shown in A. (D) Relationship between the change in response amplitude measured by intrinsic signal imaging and average moving velocity for day 1 through 6 (open circles) and for day 1 through 13 (closed circles). Points from the same animals are connected by lines. Red circles: animals that were exposed to the visual stimuli during running (n = 8). Blue circles: animals that ran with blank screen (n = 7). Note that there was no clear correlation between the magnitude of changes in response strength and the amount of time or speed of locomotion.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.02798.006 Recovery in adulthood from amblyopia induced by monocular visual deprivation during early life is slow and far from complete, even weeks after opening the deprived eye (Hubel and Wiesel, 1970; Mitchell and Sengpiel, 2009). In this study, we have used intrinsic signal imaging and single cell recording to find that locomotion, which is known to increase visual responses (Niell and Stryker, 2010), dramatically enhances the recovery of visual responses, almost to normal levels within a week. Surprisingly, the recovery of response was specific to the particular visual stimuli presented during locomotion. Neither locomotion alone nor visual stimulation alone promoted recovery. These findings suggest that recovery is facilitated only in the neural circuits that are activated during running. C57BL/6 wild-type breeders were purchased from Jackson Laboratory (Bar Harbor, ME) and bred as needed. Animals were maintained in the animal facility at University of California San Francisco and used in accordance with Protocol AN098080-01D approved by the UCSF Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. Monocular deprivation (MD) was performed as described (Gordon and Stryker, 1996) except that 2-3% isoflurane in oxygen was used for anesthesia. The lid of the right eye was sutured shut at P22-24. Mice were housed in the standard condition (12/12 dark-light cycle, free access to food and water) until P135∼150, at which time a custom stainless steel plate for head fixation was attached to the skull with dental acrylic under isoflurane anesthesia. The exposed surface of the skull was covered with a thin coat of nitrocellulose (New-Skin, Medtech Products Inc., NY) to prevent desiccation, reactive cell growth, and destruction of the bone structure. Animals were given a subcutaneous injection of carprofen (5 mg/kg) as a post-operative analgesic. 5-7 days after head-plate implantation, the closed eyelid was re-opened and groups of mice for the intrinsic signal imaging study underwent the first imaging session (day 0). The re-opened eyelid was left open afterward to allow binocular vision while animals were subjected to the different regimes of visual stimulation and locomotion as follows. (1) running with visual stimulation: The mouse was allowed to freely move its limbs and trunk on a foam ball floated on a stream of air, while its head was fixed via the implanted headplate that could be screwed into a rigid crossbar above the floating ball as described (Niell and Stryker, 2010). Two optical mice were used to measure the displacement of the ball as the mouse moved, allowing us to calculate the physical speed of the ball (Niell and Stryker, 2010). After re-opening the deprived eye, each animal spent 4 hr daily on the ball while viewing visual stimulus, over next 3 weeks (for intrinsic signal optical imaging) or 6 days (for single unit recording). Running was performed during the dark phase of the housing cycle, because we found that mice ran for longer times during this phase. (2) running without visual stimulation: Each animal ran on the floating ball exactly as the first group but viewed only a blank, mid-gray screen (∼35 lux). (3) visual stimulation alone without running (intrinsic signal imaging only): a transparent cage containing a group of mice with regular bedding materials was surrounded by four monitors with the distance of 25 cm between the center of the cage and the monitor. The visual stimulus was presented on the monitors continuously for 7-8 hr daily during which animals were allowed to behave freely without disruption by the experimenter. We extended the duration to 7-8 hr because animals were obviously active only 50-60% of time. (4) no running, no visual stimulation: mice were housed in the standard condition without running or specific visual stimulation. (5) Non-deprived control for single unit recording only: age-matched control animals, many of them being in the same litter as those in experimental groups, were housed in the standard condition with normal visual experience without running or specific visual stimulation.
Recovery from sensory deprivation is slow and incomplete in adult visual cortex. In this study, we show that visual stimulation during locomotion, which increases the gain of visual responses in primary visual cortex, dramatically enhances recovery in the mouse. Excitatory neurons regained normal levels of response, while narrow-spiking (inhibitory) neurons remained less active. Visual stimulation or locomotion alone did not enhance recovery. Responses to the particular visual stimuli viewed by the animal during locomotion recovered, while those to another normally effective stimulus did not, suggesting that locomotion promotes the recovery only of the neural circuits that are activated concurrent with the locomotion. These findings may provide an avenue for improving recovery from amblyopia in humans.
Amblyopia, otherwise known as ‘lazy eye’, is a condition in which vision fails to develop normally during childhood, not due to problems with the eye itself but due to problems with the transmission of information from the eye to the brain. It occurs when disorders such as squint—in which the eyes point in different directions—cause the brain to continually ignore input from one eye, with the result that vision in that eye never fully develops.