 Our skin is the largest sensory organ of the body and is presented with an array of tactile stimuli, including indentation, stretch, vibration, and hair deflection (Lumpkin et al., 2010). To detect, perceive, and respond to such diverse stimuli, morphologically and physiologically distinct classes of low-threshold mechanosensory neurons (LTMRs) innervate the skin and associate with cutaneous tactile end organs. These LTMRs, whose cell bodies are located in dorsal root ganglia (DRG) and cranial sensory ganglia, carry impulses from their endings in the skin to the central nervous system (Abraira and Ginty, 2013; Lechner and Lewin, 2013). LTMRs are classified as Aβ, Aδ or C based on their action potential conduction velocities (Horch et al., 1977; Rice and Albrecht, 2008). C-LTMRs are unmyelinated and thus have the slowest conduction velocities, whereas Aδ-LTMRs and Aβ-LTMRs are lightly and heavily myelinated, exhibiting intermediate and rapid conduction velocities, respectively. LTMRs are also classified as slowly, intermediately, or rapidly adapting (SA, IA, and RA-LTMRs) according to their rates of adaptation to sustained mechanical stimuli (Burgess et al., 1968; Johnson and Hsiao, 1992). Genetic labeling of Aβ RA-LTMRs, Aδ-LTMRs, and C-LTMRs has revealed that the cutaneous endings of each LTMR subtype in hairy skin form longitudinal lanceolate endings at one or more hair follicle subtypes (Li et al., 2011). We previously reported molecular-genetic strategies that enable visualization of axonal endings of C-, Aδ-, and Aβ RA-LTMRs in the skin and spinal cord of the mouse. We found that C-LTMRs can be visualized in ThCreER; Rosa26LSL-tdTomato mice treated with 4-HT; Aδ-LTMRs are visualized using TrkB(Nrtk2)tauEGFP knockin mice; and Aβ RA-LTMRs are labeled in Npy2r-GFP BAC transgenic mice (Li et al., 2011). Remarkably, in back hairy skin of the mouse, C-, Aδ-, and Aβ RA-LTMRs form morphologically similar longitudinal lanceolate endings associated with hair follicles (Figure 1). Immunostaining with S100, a glial cell marker, shows that each type of LTMR lanceolate ending is associated with TSCs, with cell bodies of TSCs residing at the base of lanceolate complexes. Moreover, TSCs associated with C-, Aδ-, and Aβ RA-LTMRs exhibit extensive longitudinal processes extending toward the skin surface. These finger-shaped processes are parallel to the long axis of the hair follicle and encase individual longitudinal lanceolate endings of C-, Aδ-, and Aβ RA-LTMRs (Figure 1). These observations are consistent with previous findings from our group and others (Iggo and Andres, 1982; Li et al., 2011; Woo et al., 2012).10.7554/eLife.01901.003Figure 1.LTMRs and TSCs form palisade-like lanceolate complexes at hair follicles.(A) On back hairy skin sections from ThCreER;Rosa26tdTomato mice, C-LTMRs are visualized using tdTomato fluorescence (green), while TSCs are labeled using S100 immunostaining (red). C-LTMRs form longitudinal lanceolate endings associated with TSCs at zigzag and awl/auchene hair follicles. (B) Back hairy skin sections from TrkBtauEGFP animals were stained with anti-GFP to label Aδ-LTMR axonal terminals and anti-S100 (red) to label TSCs. Aδ-LTMRs form longitudinal lanceolate endings associated with TSCs at zigzag and awl/auchene hair follicles. (C) Back hairy skin sections from Npy2r-GFP animals were stained with anti-GFP to label Aβ RA-LTMR axonal terminals and anti-S100 (red) to label TSCs. At a representative awl/auchene hair follicle, Aβ RA-LTMRs form longitudinal lanceolate endings associated with TSCs. Similar patterns can be seen at guard hair follicles (Li et al., 2011). Animals around 3 weeks of age were used for these experiments. Scale bar, 20 μm.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.01901.003 Hair follicle longitudinal lanceolate complexes, which are formed by Aβ RA-LTMR, Aδ-LTMR, and C-LTMR axonal endings and their associated TSCs, are the primary mechanically sensitive structures that transform hair follicle deflection into electrical impulses carried by the axonal branches of LTMR neurons to the CNS. In this study, we combined genetic labeling of LTMRs and TSCs, electron microscopic analyses, and surgical and genetic manipulations to characterize the organization, structure, maintenance, and regeneration of hair follicle lanceolate complexes of the mouse. ThCreER, TrkBtauEGFP, Npy2r-GFP BAC transgenic, Plp1CreER, Rosa26 LSL-tdTomato, Rosa26-Confetti, Rosa26GCaMP3, and Rosa26LSL-hDTR mouse lines, have been described previously (Doerflinger et al., 2003; Gong et al., 2003; Buch et al., 2005; Rotolo et al., 2008; Madisen et al., 2010; Li et al., 2011; Schepers et al., 2012; Zariwala et al., 2012). Generation of the TrkAf/f (TrkAF592A) mouse was described previously (Chen et al., 2005). In addition to the point mutation introduced into the ATP binding pocket, two Loxp sites were inserted into introns flanking exon 7 to 12 of the TrkA gene. Wnt1Cre;TrkAf/f animals were generated to achieve ablation of the TrkA gene in cells of neural crest origin. The TrkA conditional knockout animals are viable and fertile, with no obvious behavioral abnormality, though behavioral assays assessing pain, temperature, and touch sensations are likely to reveal sensory defects in these TrkA conditional mutants.
In mouse hairy skin, lanceolate complexes associated with three types of hair follicles, guard, awl/auchene and zigzag, serve as mechanosensory end organs. These structures are formed by unique combinations of low-threshold mechanoreceptors (LTMRs), Aβ RA-LTMRs, Aδ-LTMRs, and C-LTMRs, and their associated terminal Schwann cells (TSCs). In this study, we investigated the organization, ultrastructure, and maintenance of longitudinal lanceolate complexes at each hair follicle subtype. We found that TSC processes at hair follicles are tiled and that individual TSCs host axonal endings of more than one LTMR subtype. Electron microscopic analyses revealed unique ultrastructural features of lanceolate complexes that are proposed to underlie mechanotransduction. Moreover, Schwann cell ablation leads to loss of LTMR terminals at hair follicles while, in contrast, TSCs remain associated with hair follicles following skin denervation in adult mice and, remarkably, become re-associated with newly formed axons, indicating a TSC-dependence of lanceolate complex maintenance and regeneration in adults.
Many mammals, such as cats, mice, and sea lions, have long whiskers that are particularly sensitive to touch. However, the hairs that cover the skin of most mammals are also important touch detectors. These hairs grow from follicles that are connected to the ends of the nerve cells that detect and convey touch information to the central nervous system. In mice, three main types of hair follicle—guard hairs, awl hairs, and zigzag hairs—are associated with combinations of three types of nerve endings. Much remains to be understood about how hair follicles and nerve cell endings—which are wrapped by cells called terminal Schwann cells—interact via structures called lanceolate complexes.