 Homeostatic signaling systems are believed to interface with the mechanisms of neural plasticity to stabilize neural function throughout the life of an organism (Marder and Goaillard, 2006; Turrigiano, 2011; Davis, 2013). To do so, homeostatic signaling systems require bi-directional control, being able to accurately offset perturbations that persistently increase or decrease the excitation of neurons or muscle. An evolutionarily conserved, bi-directional form of homeostatic signaling is observed at the neuromuscular junction of organisms ranging from Drosophila to human (see Davis, 2013 for review). At the Drosophila NMJ, inhibition of postsynaptic glutamate receptor function leads to a compensatory increase in presynaptic neurotransmitter release that precisely restores normal muscle depolarization (Petersen et al., 1997; Davis and Goodman, 1998; Davis et al., 1998; Frank et al., 2006; Davis, 2013). This is referred to as presynaptic homeostatic potentiation (PHP). An opposing process, presynaptic homeostatic depression (PHD), can be induced by presynaptic overexpression of the vesicular glutamate transporter (vGlut2), which causes an increase in the amount of glutamate packaged within individual synaptic vesicles and a corresponding increase in synaptic vesicle diameter (Daniels et al., 2004). These larger vesicles produce larger average spontaneous miniature excitatory post-synaptic potentials (mEPSPs). A homeostatic decrease in presynaptic vesicle release, however, maintains evoked EPSP amplitudes at wild type levels despite increased mEPSP amplitude (Daniels et al., 2004). We first confirmed that presynaptic overexpression of the vGlut2 glutamate transporter (UAS-vGlut2) caused an increase in average mEPSP amplitude and a corresponding decrease in presynaptic vesicle release (Daniels et al., 2004; Figure 1A-E). Animals overexpressing UAS-vGlut2 (referred to hereafter as vGlut-OE animals) displayed a shift of the entire mEPSP amplitude distribution, corresponding to larger miniature release events (Figure 1E). As previously shown (Daniels et al., 2004), a decrease in presynaptic release is able to precisely offset the increase in mEPSP amplitude, thereby restoring EPSP amplitudes to wild type levels (Figure 1A,C). Since EPSP amplitudes are maintained at wild type levels, these data support the conclusion that a homeostatic signaling system detects the change in average mEPSP amplitude and drives a compensatory reduction in presynaptic neurotransmitter release that precisely offsets the magnitude of increased mEPSP amplitude. This compensatory response will be referred to as PHD to distinguish this process from PHP.10.7554/eLife.05473.003Figure 1.vGlut-OE animals display increased miniature EPSP amplitude and a compensatory decrease in vesicle release.(A) Representative EPSP traces following stimulation of a single action potential in wild type and vGlut-OE animals; representative mEPSP traces in inset. (B) Representative EPSC traces following stimulation of a single action potential in wild type and vGlut-OE animals; representative mEPSC traces in inset. (C) vGlut-OE animals have increased mEPSP amplitudes (p < 0.0001) with no change in evoked EPSP amplitudes (p = 0.08), resulting in a decrease in calculated quantal content (p < 0.0001, n > 12 NMJ per genotype). (D) vGlut overexpression results in increased mEPSC amplitudes (p < 0.0001), but no significant change in evoked EPSC amplitudes, resulting in a decrease in calculated quantal content (p < 0.01, n > 8 per genotype, error bars = SEM). (E) The cumulative frequency of mEPSPs is shifted to greater amplitudes in vGlut-OE animals. (F) Quantal content is able to scale across an order of magnitude in response to perturbations that increase (vGlut2 overexpression) or decrease (PhTx treatment) quantal amplitude. An exponential function was fit to these data points with R2 = 0.7491. [Ca]e = 3 mM for (B) and (D), 0.3 mM for all others. Error bars = SEM for all.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.05473.003 Here, we demonstrate that PHD is driven by a reduction in presynaptic calcium channel abundance at individual active zones. This mechanism is consistent with the co-expression and co-regulation of PHD and PHP, achieving bi-directional homeostatic control of neurotransmission at the NMJ. More specifically, recent data support a model in which PHP is driven by the regulated insertion of an ENaC channel in the presynaptic membrane. This is thought to cause a modest depolarization of the presynaptic membrane, subsequent potentiation of calcium influx and enhanced vesicle release (Davis, 2013; Younger et al., 2013). This mechanism should function normally, regardless of a change in the number of presynaptic calcium channels per active zone. Therefore, if PHD is driven by a decrease in calcium channel number, PHP can be subsequently induced through insertion of presynaptic ENaC channels. Consistent with this idea, application of an ENaC channel blocker prevents expression of PHP in the vGlut-OE background. Although the proposed mechanisms of PHP and PHD are compatible, it is none-the-less remarkable that PHP and PHD can be combined to precisely target the correct EPSP amplitude, offsetting two persistent perturbations: enlarged presynaptic vesicles, and impaired postsynaptic glutamate receptor sensitivity. The mechanisms that enable PHP and PHD to be combined in this manner remain to be elucidated. Our data indicate that the genetic underpinnings responsible for PHP and PHD are distinct, since three conditions that block PHP have no impact on PHD. Thus, we propose that rheostat-like modulation of presynaptic release is achieved by the intersection of two distinct signaling systems driving PHP and PHD. Drosophila stocks were maintained at 22-25°C on normal food. The w1118 strain was used as a wild-type control, matching the genetic background of all transgenic lines used in this study. UAS-vGlut2 flies were obtained from Aaron DiAntonio. In all cases, vGlut2 overexpression was driven by OK371-Gal4. rim103 mutant animals were previously generated (Müller et al., 2012). A plasmid containing Archaerhodopsin3 (Arch) with a C terminal GFP tag was obtained (Addgene plasmid 22217). The coding sequence for Arch was cloned into the pUAST destination vector to generate UAS-Arch. This construct was confirmed by sequencing. Transgenic flies were generated using standard injection methods by BestGene Inc. Stocks containing UAS-Arch insertions on chromosome two and three were used for experiments. All imaging and electrophysiology experiments on Arch expressing flies were performed using two copies of UAS-Arch (2 on chromosome II, or 1 on II and 1 on III) and one copy of the motor neuron driver OK371-GAL4. For Arch imaging experiments, crosses were set up and allowed to lay for 2-3 days on food containing 1 mM all-trans retinal (ATR). Crosses containing ATR food were wrapped in foil and kept at 25°C. All other flies were obtained from the Bloomington Drosophila Stock Center.
Homeostatic signaling stabilizes synaptic transmission at the neuromuscular junction (NMJ) of Drosophila, mice, and human. It is believed that homeostatic signaling at the NMJ is bi-directional and considerable progress has been made identifying mechanisms underlying the homeostatic potentiation of neurotransmitter release. However, very little is understood mechanistically about the opposing process, homeostatic depression, and how bi-directional plasticity is achieved. Here, we show that homeostatic potentiation and depression can be simultaneously induced, demonstrating true bi-directional plasticity. Next, we show that mutations that block homeostatic potentiation do not alter homeostatic depression, demonstrating that these are genetically separable processes. Finally, we show that homeostatic depression is achieved by decreased presynaptic calcium channel abundance and calcium influx, changes that are independent of the presynaptic action potential waveform. Thus, we identify a novel mechanism of homeostatic synaptic plasticity and propose a model that can account for the observed bi-directional, homeostatic control of presynaptic neurotransmitter release.
Neurons are organised into networks via junctions called synapses. The arrival of an electrical signal, called an action potential, at a neuronal synapse causes an influx of calcium ions into the cell. This in turn causes packages of chemicals called neurotransmitters that are stored inside the cell to fuse with the neuron's membrane, which releases their contents from the neuron. These molecules bind to the cell on the other side of the synapse (another neuron or a muscle cell), and the action potential can be regenerated.