 Since the early 1990s, thousands of functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) studies have offered new insights into the functional architecture of the brain and have significantly increased our understanding of normal and aberrant brain functions. The earliest papers investigated task-based fMRI, where evoked BOLD signal changes were interpreted as hemodynamic responses subsequent to neural activity (Ogawa et al., 1990; Bandettini et al., 1992; Kwong et al., 1992; Ogawa et al., 1992) and were used to infer which brain regions were activated for a specific task. The range and impact of fMRI methods were expanded in 1995 when Biswal et al. established the existence of correlations between low-frequency (< 0.08 Hz) BOLD signals from spatially distinct locations when no task was performed (Biswal et al., 1995), and over 4000 subsequent papers have documented different aspects of resting state fMRI. Importantly, these correlations have been widely adopted to infer functional connectivity between cortical regions (Greicius et al., 2003; Fox et al., 2005; Smith, 2012). The identification of patterns of highly correlated low-frequency signals in the resting brain provides a powerful approach to delineate and describe neural circuits, and an unprecedented insight into the manner in which distributed regions work together to achieve specific functions (Pizoli et al., 2011). In this study, we present the first robust demonstrations that similar phenomena can be detected within the gray matter of the human spinal cord, and we report our preliminary attempts to perform resting state connectivity studies within the cords of normal volunteers. Functional images were preprocessed to mitigate rigid-body motion and physiological noise, and spatially interpolated to match the digital resolution of the T2*-weighted anatomical images (Figure 2). A 14-step standardized analysis protocol (described in 'Materials and methods') was used for each of the 22 subjects studied. In each subject, temporal signal-to-noise ratio (TSNR) was measured in spinal gray matter upon completion of the functional-to-anatomical affine registration (step #9) as well as after the application of CSF and white matter ‘regressors of no interest’ (steps #11 and #12). Across all 22 subjects, we observed a 30% increase in median TSNR (from 29.3 to 38.1) after the application of these few regressors, demonstrating the importance of characterizing and removing structured noise sources (Xie et al., 2012). After band-pass filtering to isolate the frequency range of interest (0.01–0.08 Hz), single-subject analyses show that statistically significant correlations are measurable between selected regions and are reproducible across subjects. As an illustrative example with the corresponding time series, an analysis performed on one subject (female, 23 years old) demonstrates connectivity with the contralateral ventral horns in the same slice and with adjacent slices when a seed region is selected in the center of the right ventral horn (Figure 3). A stringent threshold of |z| > 3.29 (a two-tailed 99.9% confidence interval) was selected to show that connectivity is focused in the gray matter horns and not in central gray matter (connecting left and right sides and largely dominated by the central canal) nor adjacent white matter, which provides evidence that such gray matter correlations cannot be simply attributed to spatially correlated physiological noise and more likely represent genuine functional connectivity. Further examples of within-slice connectivity analyses in single subjects confirm that reproducible focal connectivity is found between ventral horns (Figure 4A–F) and between dorsal horns (Figure 4G–J). There is also evidence of plausible connectivity with central gray matter (Figure 4K) and between ventral and dorsal horns (Figure 4L), but these correlations are less consistent across all slices and not statistically significant at the group level. To quantify the occurrence of within-slice correlations between gray matter sub-regions across slices, we averaged time courses within each respective gray matter sub-region (defined in step #14) and considered only positive correlations at a more conventional 95% confidence interval (z > 1.65; one-tailed). Across all 264 slices (12 slices/subject × 22 subjects), we observed that 67% of slices (177 of 264) exhibit significant correlations between ventral horns and 37% of slices (97 of 264) exhibit significant correlations between dorsal horns. In comparison, a markedly fewer number of slices (only 1 in 5) exhibited significant correlations between the remaining four pairs: 21% between left ventral and left dorsal horns (55 of 264), 21% between left ventral and right dorsal horns (55 of 264), 20% between right ventral and left dorsal horns (54 of 264), and 23% between right ventral and right dorsal horns (62 of 264).10.7554/eLife.02812.004Figure 2.Functional weighted spinal cord images at 7 Tesla.A single volume of twelve contiguous T2*-weighted slices centered on the C3/C4 junction (as illustrated in Figure 1A) in one subject. Each volume was acquired with 0.91 × 0.91 × 4 mm3 voxels and resampled to 0.31 × 0.31 × 4 mm3 voxels during the affine functional-to-anatomical registration. Excellent contrast between white matter and cerebrospinal fluid facilitates accurate registration between such functional volumes and high-resolution anatomical images (Figure 1B). The use of a 3D acquisition sequence with relatively short echo time and relatively few k-space lines per radiofrequency pulse provides high-quality images with minimal signal drop-out and geometric distortions, although artifacts caused by fat shift of the nerve root sleeve in the phase-encode direction still affect the dorsal edge in a few slices.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.02812.00410.7554/eLife.02812.005Figure 3.A single-subject analysis of resting state functional connectivity with corresponding time series.For clarity, only outlines of the gray matter butterfly and surrounding white matter are shown (rostro-caudal from left to right). Red and yellow represent statistically significant positive correlation with the seed time series (using a two-sided 99.9% confidence interval where red is 3.29 < z ≤ 3.89 and yellow is z > 3.89), and blue represents negative correlation (z < −3.29). The seed voxel is selected in the right ventral horn in C5, and exhibits functional connectivity with the contralateral ventral horn in the same slice as well as adjacent slices. Such connectivity between ventral horns is observed across all subjects. In each of the four plots, a 3.5-min segment of the seed time course is shown in black and the time course of the corresponding region of interest is shown in magenta. The highest correlations are observed in the contralateral ventral horn on the same slice (z = 4.10) and on the adjacent slices (z = 4.38). Correlations with central gray matter (z = 2.55) and adjacent white matter (z = 0.84) are relatively low, which, given the small size of the spinal cord, suggest that such correlations are genuine and not dominated by widespread physiological noise.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.02812.00510.7554/eLife.02812.006Figure 4.Examples of within-slice resting state functional connectivity across subjects.These analyses were performed using AFNI's ‘InstaCorr’ with p < 0.001 and no minimum cluster size. In each panel, a seed voxel is marked with a green crosshair and resultant correlations are overlaid on the anatomical image. (A)–(F) Connectivity between ventral horns for subjects 1, 3, 8, 10, 11, and 13, respectively. (G)–(J) Connectivity between dorsal horns for subjects 5, 16, 18, and 22, respectively. (K and L) Less common correlations within gray matter. In (K) (subject 20), focal connectivity between ventral horns and with central gray matter. In (L) (subject 7), connectivity between ventral horns but also with the contralateral dorsal horn. At the single-subject level, there is some evidence for functional connectivity between ventral and dorsal horns, but such correlations are less common across slices and not statistically significant at the group level.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.02812.006 We have presented the first conclusive demonstration that ultra-high field fMRI can non-invasively detect and characterize resting state BOLD signals within the gray matter of the human spinal cord. Low-frequency temporal correlations were observed between gray matter horns in all subjects, and examples of these correlations are presented in Figure 3 and Figure 4. Within a given axial slice, the strongest and most robust correlations were between left and right ventral horns. Correlations were also observed between left and right dorsal horns, and the reproducibility of correlations between ventral horns and between dorsal horns was demonstrated within a cohort of 22 healthy volunteers (Figure 5). Although correlations between ventral and dorsal gray matter were also observed at the single-subject level (Figure 4L), such findings were less frequent and not statistically significant at the group level. The absence of group-level correlations between spinal gray matter and adjacent white matter showed that these positive gray matter correlations are unlikely to be driven by spatially-correlated physiological noise. In fact, supplementary analyses without CSF or white matter regressors (Figure 5—figure supplement 1a) revealed strong correlations within gray matter and within white matter but not between gray and white matter, suggesting that gray and white matter in the spinal cord may exhibit different degrees of physiological fluctuations. The main analyses (Figure 5) also showed anticorrelations between white matter sub-regions. These observations were not unexpected because negative correlations are commonly seen in the brain (Chang and Glover, 2010), but additional analyses (Figure 5—figure supplement 1) revealed that correlations within white matter were heavily influenced by preprocessing methodology. As a result, the nature of negative white matter correlations remains unclear and requires further investigation. However, predominantly positive correlations between dorsal white matter sub-regions persisted across preprocessing permutations. Although the origins of these positive white matter correlations remain to be determined, and whereas in general BOLD signals from activation have been difficult to detect in brain white matter, we note that Ding et al. recently reported the reliable detection of anisotropic correlations of resting state BOLD signals in brain white matter that appear to mimic white matter tracts identified by diffusion imaging methods (Ding et al., 2013). Moreover, the white matter sub-regions within the cord also tend to be close to draining veins. Experiments were performed on a Philips Achieva 7 Tesla scanner with a custom-designed (Nova Medical Inc.) quadrature transmit and 16-channel receive coil array for cervical spinal cord imaging. 22 healthy volunteers (11 male, 21–63 years; 11 female, 23–34 years; 28.4 plus-minus 8.8 years) with no history of spinal cord injury or neurological impairment were recruited and scanned under protocols approved by the Institutional Review Board at Vanderbilt University Medical Center. Female participants of childbearing potential required a negative urine pregnancy test for the scan to proceed. Non-MR study data were collected and managed using REDCap electronic data capture tools hosted at Vanderbilt University (Harris et al., 2009). REDCap (Research Electronic Data Capture) is a secure, web-based application designed to support data capture for research studies.
Functional magnetic resonance imaging using blood oxygenation level dependent (BOLD) contrast is well established as one of the most powerful methods for mapping human brain function. Numerous studies have measured how low-frequency BOLD signal fluctuations from the brain are correlated between voxels in a resting state, and have exploited these signals to infer functional connectivity within specific neural circuits. However, to date there have been no previous substantiated reports of resting state correlations in the spinal cord. In a cohort of healthy volunteers, we observed robust functional connectivity between left and right ventral (motor) horns, and between left and right dorsal (sensory) horns. Our results demonstrate that low-frequency BOLD fluctuations are inherent in the spinal cord as well as the brain, and by analogy to cortical circuits, we hypothesize that these correlations may offer insight into the execution and maintenance of sensory and motor functions both locally and within the cerebrum.
Brain imaging methods such as functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) can provide us with a picture of what the brain is doing when a person is carrying out a specific task. For example, an fMRI scan recorded whilst someone is reading is likely to show activity in regions in the left hemisphere of the brain that are known to be involved in language comprehension. fMRI can also be used to measure patterns of neuronal activity when someone is awake but not engaged in a specific task. This approach, known as resting state fMRI, can be used to examine which regions of the resting brain are active at the same time. Researchers are interested in these patterns of brain activity because they reflect neural circuits that work together to produce different functions and behaviors.