 Glutamate excitotoxicity has long been suggested to contribute to the degeneration of motoneurons in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis. Intrinsic hyperexcitability of motoneurons, which increases discharge probability and thereby calcium inflow, has been assumed to participate in the excitotoxic process (Ilieva et al., 2009). However, it was recently suggested that hyperexcitability improves motoneuron survival (Saxena et al., 2013). Regardless of its effect, it is still not clear whether spinal motoneurons are hyperexcitable in mutant superoxide dismutase 1 (mSOD1) mice, a standard model of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). Indeed, changes in excitability occur very early in mSOD1 mice (Elbasiouny et al., 2010). Motoneurons from mSOD1 embryos recorded in culture are hyperexcitable (Pieri et al., 2003; Kuo et al., 2005): they are recruited at lower current and display higher F-I gain. Similarly, Martin et al. (2013) found, in an in vitro preparation of mSOD1 embryonic cord, that motoneurons are also hyperexcitable: their dendritic tree is reduced causing an increase in input resistance. Investigations in neonates have led to contradictory results. Hypoglossal motoneurons were reported to be hyperexcitable (F-I gain is increased, van Zundert et al., 2008). However, Pambo-Pambo et al. (2009) did not observe any change in spinal motoneuron input resistance, rheobase, or stationary gain suggesting that their excitability was unchanged. In the same line, Quinlan et al. (2011) found that the excitability of spinal motoneurons is homeostatically maintained despite an increase in their input conductance (recruitment current and F-I gain unchanged). In contrast, Bories et al. (2007) reported a decrease in input resistance causing the spinal motoneurons to be hypoexcitable. In neonatal mice, spinal motoneurons can be sorted according to their firing pattern. Figure 1A illustrates how two motoneurons in a wild-type (WT) mouse discharge in response to a long (5 s) square pulse at rheobase, that is, the minimal current pulse that elicits at least one action potential in our protocol (see ‘Materials and methods’). In the example of Figure 1A1, the motoneuron did not fire at the onset of a 1.6 nA square pulse. Instead the motoneuron depolarized slowly and started to fire only 2.9 s after the pulse onset when the membrane potential reached the voltage threshold for spiking (−35 mV, dashed line). Once the firing started, its frequency increased. This motoneuron displayed the delayed firing pattern. A very important feature of this pattern is illustrated in Figure 1—figure supplement 1. The delay was long at rheobase (Figure 1—figure supplement 1A) but it progressively decreased (Figure 1—figure supplement 1B-C) to finally disappear (Figure 1—figure supplement 1D) as the current intensity increased. 63 out of 94 WT motoneurons (67%) exhibited this delayed firing pattern. The remaining motoneurons displayed the so-called immediate firing pattern: at rheobase, the motoneuron discharged at the pulse onset without any delay (Figure 1A2). In the immediate firing pattern, the spiking frequency remained constant with little variability. 31 out of the 94 WT motoneurons (i.e., 33%) displayed the immediate firing pattern.10.7554/eLife.04046.003Figure 1.Electrical and morphological properties of motoneurons displaying the delayed and the immediate firing patterns.(A1) WT motoneuron displaying the delayed firing pattern in response to a 5 s pulse. The current intensity was the minimal intensity necessary to elicit firing in our searching protocol (rheobase). Bottom: injected-current (square pulses), middle: voltage-response and top: instantaneous firing frequency. The horizontal dashed line shows the voltage threshold for spiking (−50 mV). (A2) Response of a WT motoneuron displaying the immediate firing pattern. Same arrangement as in A1. (Voltage threshold for spiking: −59 mV). (B1) Single action potentials from a delayed (black line) and an immediate (gray line) firing WT motoneurons elicited by a short square pulse of current. The arrowheads point to the horizontal dotted bar drawn at half action potential amplitudes. (B2) Same records at a longer time base in order to show the after hyperpolarisation (AHP). Dashed lines are the exponential fits of the AHP relaxation. The relaxation time constants are 17 ms and 37 ms for the delayed firing and the immediate firing motoneurons, respectively. Note that the relaxation time constant is longer in the immediate firing motoneuron than in the delayed firing one. C Reconstructed dendritic trees of WT delayed (C1) and immediate (C2) firing motoneurons. The axon was not reconstructed in either case. Reconstructions are projected in the same plane as the slice.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.04046.00310.7554/eLife.04046.004Figure 1—figure supplement 1.In delayed firing motoneurons, the delay depends on the intensity of stimulation.(A-D) Responses of a delayed firing motoneuron to long lasting pulses (5 s) of increasing amplitude. Bottom: injected-current (square pulses in nA). Top: voltage-response (in mV). Note that the delay decreased when the current intensity increased.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.04046.004 We show that only spinal motoneurons that display the immediate firing pattern undergo substantial electrical and morphological alterations in neonatal mSOD1 mice whereas no changes occur in the motoneurons displaying the delayed firing pattern. In immediate firing motoneurons, their dendrites are about 30% shorter in mSOD1 compared to WT mice. Furthermore their rheobase is decreased, their voltage threshold for spiking is hyperpolarized and mixed mode oscillations are largely absent. This indicates that the immediate firing motoneurons become more excitable in mSOD1 mice. The experiments were performed in accordance with European directives (86/609/CEE and 2010-63-UE) and the French legislation. They were approved by Paris Descartes University ethics committee (Permit Number: CEEA34.BLDI.065.12.). All surgery was performed under sodium pentobarbital anesthesia, and every effort was made to minimize suffering. 6 to 10 day-old high expressor line B6.Cg-Tg(SOD1-G93A)1Gur/J mice and their non-transgenic littermates of either sex were used (The Jackson Laboratory, RRID:IMSR_JAX:004435). Genotyping was performed following the protocol given by the Jackson Laboratory.
In amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) the large motoneurons that innervate the fast-contracting muscle fibers (F-type motoneurons) are vulnerable and degenerate in adulthood. In contrast, the small motoneurons that innervate the slow-contracting fibers (S-type motoneurons) are resistant and do not degenerate. Intrinsic hyperexcitability of F-type motoneurons during early postnatal development has long been hypothesized to contribute to neural degeneration in the adult. Here, we performed a critical test of this hypothesis by recording from identified F- and S-type motoneurons in the superoxide dismutase-1 mutant G93A (mSOD1), a mouse model of ALS at a neonatal age when early pathophysiological changes are observed. Contrary to the standard hypothesis, excitability of F-type motoneurons was unchanged in the mutant mice. Surprisingly, the S-type motoneurons of mSDO1 mice did display intrinsic hyperexcitability (lower rheobase, hyperpolarized spiking threshold). As S-type motoneurons are resistant in ALS, we conclude that early intrinsic hyperexcitability does not contribute to motoneuron degeneration.
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), which is also known as Lou Gherig's disease or motoneuron disease, is a neurodegenerative disorder in which muscles throughout the body gradually waste away due to the death of the neurons that control their activity. The disease often begins with weakness of the arms or legs, but progresses to include difficulties with movements such as swallowing and breathing. Around half of those affected die within 3 or 4 years of diagnosis.