 Oscillatory brain activity, mostly categorized to the theta (3-12 Hz), beta (12-30 Hz), and gamma (30-80 Hz) bands, is thought to coordinate neural activity in vast neuronal assemblies dispersed over different brain regions (Buzsáki and Draguhn, 2004). This type of coordination may underlie high level cognitive functions, such as speech and social communication (Uhlhaas and Singer, 2006; Uhlhaas et al., 2009) that are impaired in autism spectrum disorders (ASD) (Geschwind, 2009). Increasing evidence suggest that individuals with ASD show deficits in long-range neuronal communication associated with low-frequency rhythms, such as the theta rhythm (Geschwind and Levitt, 2007; Rippon et al., 2007; Wass, 2011). Nonetheless, a clear connection between rhythmic brain activity and social behavior has not yet been established. Electrophysiological recordings were carried out in the brains of freely behaving adult male rats performing the SRM habituation-dishabituation paradigm (Figure 2A). We first analyzed the dynamics of the local field potential (LFP) in the course of the behavioral paradigm. A highly rhythmic LFP was recorded in all brain areas during social encounters (Figure 2B). Power spectral density (PSD) analysis of the LFP showed a prominent peak at ∼8 Hz, typical for the high theta band (Buzsáki and Draguhn, 2004), in all areas (Figure 2C). The value of this peak, termed theta power (TP), was very low in the absence of a social stimulus (Base, Figure 2D-E) but increased profoundly during the first encounter (Enc. 1). It then gradually decreased during further encounters with the same stimulus (Enc. 2-4), but increased again when another novel stimulus was introduced (Enc. 5). These changes in theta power during SRM testing closely followed the changes in investigation time (IT) (Figure 2F), with both parameters appearing to correlate with the degree of stimulus novelty.10.7554/eLife.03614.005Figure 2.Theta rhythmicity in the rat brain is enhanced during social encounters, in correlation with the novelty of the social stimulus.(A) A scheme of the habituation-dishabituation SRM paradigm. (B) Examples of LFP traces recorded in the MOB, LS, and MeA during a social encounter. (C) Power spectral density (PSD) analyses of a 5-min LFP recording from all five brain areas during a social encounter. Gray bar represents the 7-9 Hz band. (D) Superimposed PSD analyses of LFP recordings from the MeA of one animal during the various stages of the SRM test. (E) As in D, zooming on the 4-10 Hz range. (F) The ∼8 Hz PSD peak (TP) and social investigation time (IT) for the same experiment as in D, plotted as a function of the encounter number. Encounter 0 represents no stimulus (Base).DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.03614.005 This study demonstrates that an encounter with a social stimulus causes increased LFP rhythmicity in the high theta range (7-10 Hz), in a network of limbic brain areas associated with social memory. Strikingly, the change in theta rhythmicity is directly proportional to the novelty of the social partner, and may thus be considered a neuronal correlate of short-term social memory (Liebe et al., 2012). Since the modulation of theta rhythmicity is observed even when anesthetized stimuli are used, we infer that it does not depend on the behavior of the social stimulus. Despite the similarity in investigative behavior, such modulation of theta rhythmicity is not observed with object stimuli, suggesting that it is social specific. Since the augmented theta rhythmicity and the associated increase in theta coherence persist beyond the removal of the social stimulus itself, we conclude that these parameters do not mirror sensory inputs but rather reflect a state of arousal that slowly fades away. This is in agreement with the fact that the increase in theta power occurs prior to the actual introduction of the social stimulus in the arena, suggesting increased arousal due to the anticipated social encounter. Finally, since the change in theta rhythmicity during the SRM test correlates with the novelty of the social stimulus, we posit that it reflects a graded level of arousal, which is proportional to the stimulus saliency. Sprague-Dawley (SD) male rats (5-6 weeks of age, 250-300 gr) served as subjects while SD or Wistar Hola/Hannover male rats (5-6 weeks of age, 250-300 gr) served as stimuli. All rats were purchased from Harlan Laboratories (Jerusalem, Israel) and housed in groups (2-5 per cage) in the SPF rat facility of the University of Haifa under veterinary supervision, food and water available ad libidum, lights on between 7:00 and 19:00. Experiments were performed in a strict accordance with the guidelines of the University of Haifa and approved by its Animal Care and Use Committee.
Rhythmic activity in the theta range is thought to promote neuronal communication between brain regions. In this study, we performed chronic telemetric recordings in socially behaving rats to monitor electrophysiological activity in limbic brain regions linked to social behavior. Social encounters were associated with increased rhythmicity in the high theta range (7-10 Hz) that was proportional to the stimulus degree of novelty. This modulation of theta rhythmicity, which was specific for social stimuli, appeared to reflect a brain-state of social arousal. In contrast, the same network responded to a fearful stimulus by enhancement of rhythmicity in the low theta range (3-7 Hz). Moreover, theta rhythmicity showed different pattern of coherence between the distinct brain regions in response to social and fearful stimuli. We suggest that the two types of stimuli induce distinct arousal states that elicit different patterns of theta rhythmicity, which cause the same brain areas to communicate in different modes.
For the brain to function correctly, the activities of multiple regions must be coordinated. This coordination is thought to be carried out by waves of electrical activity in the brain. One of the most prominent signals within these waves is called the theta rhythm.