 Most human behaviors, such as speech, music, or athletic performance, are learned through a gradual process of trial and error. In all of these behaviors, the motor actions are shaped during learning by an internal model of good performance (Wolpert et al., 1995). While a great deal has been learned about the neural mechanisms by which external rewards, such as food or juice drops, are represented in the brain and might shape future behavior (Schultz et al., 1997; Hikosaka, 2007), little is known about how the brain evaluates its own performance, where such self-evaluation is computed and how these signals might shape future behavior. To elucidate the spatial pattern of cortical neurons projecting to the dopaminergic midbrain in songbirds, we made small injections of a retrograde tracer (cholera toxin subunit β, CTB) into VTA and SNc (n = 12 zebra finches, Figure 1B, see ‘Materials and methods’). Consistent with an earlier report (Gale et al., 2008), we observed a distinct mass of retrogradely labeled cell bodies within the ventral-most extent of the intermediate arcopallium. Labeled neurons were distributed in a complex pattern that was highly consistent across birds (Figure 1C, Figure 1—figure supplement 1). The main cluster of labeled neurons was arranged in a stem-like column ventral to RA (robust nucleus of the arcopallium), while a distinct ‘stripe’ of labeled neurons was observed 300-400 µm anterior to the main cluster. A smaller number of labeled neurons formed a thin shell around the dorsal surface of RA, as previously described (Gale et al., 2008). We will refer specifically and collectively to the arcopallial areas containing neurons retrogradely labeled from the dopaminergic midbrain, described above, as the ventral intermediate arcopallium (AIV). Motivated by the hypothesized role of dopaminergic signaling in reinforcement learning (Houk et al., 1994; Schultz et al., 1997; Bayer and Glimcher, 2005; Tsai et al., 2009), we set out to examine the role in vocal learning of a recently discovered songbird cortical area (Gale et al., 2008) that projects to VTA and SNc. We have characterized the spatial extent of neurons within the intermediate arcopallium that project to VTA and SNc, and refer to the region of arcopallium retrogradely labeled from these midbrain dopaminergic areas as AIV. Using a combination of anatomical and electrophysiological techniques, we have elucidated the afferent inputs to AIV neurons from other cortical areas. We examined the effect on vocal learning of lesions targeted to AIV, and carried out electrophysiological recordings of AIV neurons. Our findings are broadly consistent with the hypothesis that an arcopallial region with descending auditory cortical projections, both to the dopaminergic midbrain and to midbrain and brainstem auditory centers, plays a role in vocal learning. Animal subjects were male zebra finches (n = 110) (45-120 days post hatch, dph). Birds were obtained from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology zebra finch breeding facility (Cambridge, Massachusetts). The care and experimental manipulation of the animals were carried out in accordance with guidelines of the National Institutes of Health and were reviewed and approved by the Massachusetts Institute of Technology Committee on Animal Care.
Many learned motor behaviors are acquired by comparing ongoing behavior with an internal representation of correct performance, rather than using an explicit external reward. For example, juvenile songbirds learn to sing by comparing their song with the memory of a tutor song. At present, the brain regions subserving song evaluation are not known. In this study, we report several findings suggesting that song evaluation involves an avian 'cortical' area previously shown to project to the dopaminergic midbrain and other downstream targets. We find that this ventral portion of the intermediate arcopallium (AIV) receives inputs from auditory cortical areas, and that lesions of AIV result in significant deficits in vocal learning. Additionally, AIV neurons exhibit fast responses to disruptive auditory feedback presented during singing, but not during nonsinging periods. Our findings suggest that auditory cortical areas may guide learning by transmitting song evaluation signals to the dopaminergic midbrain and/or other subcortical targets.
Most new skills, from playing a sport to learning a language, are acquired through a gradual process of trial and error. While some of this learning is driven by direct external rewards, such as praise, much of it occurs when the individual compares their current performance with their own impression of what a ‘correct’ performance should be. The way that the brain responds to external rewards is relatively well understood, but much less is known about the processes used by the brain to evaluate its own performance.