 A key challenge faced by the auditory system is to appropriately segregate and group sound elements into their component sources. This process of auditory scene analysis underlies our ability to listen to one sound while ignoring others and is crucial for everyday listening. While psychophysical studies have focused on the perceptual ‘rules’ that govern the likelihood of elements being grouped into single objects in audition (Bregman, 1990; Bizley and Cohen, 2013) or in vision (Marr, 1982; Lee and Yuille, 2006), perception is a seamlessly multisensory process whereby sensory information is integrated both within and across different sensory modalities. It is of great interest to understand how the formation of cross-modal objects might influence perception, and in particular, whether visual information may provide additional cues that listeners can use to facilitate auditory scene segregation through the generation of auditory-visual objects. To date, there has yet to be a study utilizing ongoing, continuous stimuli that demonstrates a perceptual benefit of an uninformative visual stimulus when selectively attending to one auditory stimulus in a mixture. All methods were approved by the Institutional Review Board of the University of Washington and the Ethics Committee of the University College London (ref: 5139). We sought to measure a behavioral benefit that could be ascribed directly to the temporal coherence between auditory and visual streams: specifically, whether coherence between a visual stimulus and a task-irrelevant auditory feature could improve performance in an auditory selective attention task. Importantly, the visual stimulus was uninformative of the auditory task, such that any behavioral benefit could be unambiguously determined to be the result of selective enhancement of an auditory stream due to binding with the visual stimulus. This cross-feature enhancement thus served simultaneously as our assay of audio-visual binding (eschewing subjective judgments) and an investigation of binding's impact on auditory scene analysis. Here, we used temporal coherence between auditory and visual features to influence the way subjects parsed an audio-visual scene. Many studies have examined how the timing of single auditory and visual events (Fujisaki and Nishida, 2005; Zampini et al., 2005) or simple periodic modulations of stimulus features (Recanzone, 2003; Spence and Squire, 2003; Fujisaki and Nishida, 2005) influence the likelihood of an integrated multisensory percept. However, the temporal dynamics of one event or a repeating sequence are quite unlike many natural sounds, including speech. A recent study addressed this by creating randomly timed sequences of discrete auditory-visual events, and showed that coherence discrimination was better for the unpredictable sequences than for predictable ones (Denison et al., 2013). Thus, the noisy dynamics of stimulus features used here not only allowed our stimuli to more closely emulate speech, but likely also strengthened the bound percept. Subjects gave written informed consent and were paid for their participation. Subjects had normal hearing (audiologic thresholds ≤20 dB hearing loss at octave frequencies from 250 to 8000 Hz) and normal or corrected visual acuity. A total of 32 subjects participated (17 male, age 18-33 years). A separate group of 16 subjects each participated in the pitch event and timbre event tasks. The pitch task was run at the University of Washington in the lab of AKCL. The timbre task was performed at the University College London in the lab of JKB.
In noisy settings, listening is aided by correlated dynamic visual cues gleaned from a talker's face—an improvement often attributed to visually reinforced linguistic information. In this study, we aimed to test the effect of audio-visual temporal coherence alone on selective listening, free of linguistic confounds. We presented listeners with competing auditory streams whose amplitude varied independently and a visual stimulus with varying radius, while manipulating the cross-modal temporal relationships. Performance improved when the auditory target's timecourse matched that of the visual stimulus. The fact that the coherence was between task-irrelevant stimulus features suggests that the observed improvement stemmed from the integration of auditory and visual streams into cross-modal objects, enabling listeners to better attend the target. These findings suggest that in everyday conditions, where listeners can often see the source of a sound, temporal cues provided by vision can help listeners to select one sound source from a mixture.
In the noisy din of a cocktail party, there are many sources of sound that compete for our attention. Even so, we can easily block out the noise and focus on a conversation, especially when we are talking to someone in front of us.