 We adapt to different situations by sorting information into behaviorally meaningful categories that can change rapidly across contexts. This categorization process allows us to interact with such environments. Eager to get to an important meeting, we drive fast, but the actual speed depends on the speed limits along the way. In this situation, categories are delineated by a category boundary (i.e., speed limit) that varies with different environments. Flexible categorization requires continuous monitoring of the changes in the environment to ensure that classification reflects current task demands, even after categories are well learned. How the brain monitors such complex cognitive behavior is not well understood. The basal ganglia, particularly the caudate nucleus, are known to be essential for flexible behavior (Wise et al., 1996; Barnes et al., 2005) and together with the interconnected prefrontal and parietal cortices play an important role in categorization (Poldrack et al., 1999; Poldrack et al., 2001; Seger and Cincotta, 2005; Freedman and Assad, 2006; Seger, 2008; Antzoulatos and Miller, 2011; Ashby and Maddox, 2011; Mendez et al., 2011; Merchant et al., 2011). Many psychiatric and neurological disorders that compromise the caudate nucleus are characterized by impairment in cognitive flexibility (Knowlton et al., 1996; Shohamy et al., 2004; Montoya et al., 2006). Human and animal studies have provided extensive evidence for the critical role of this structure in category learning (Seger and Miller, 2010; Antzoulatos and Miller, 2011). Neurobiological models of categorization have suggested that the caudate nucleus, together with interconnected cortical and subcortical structures, contributes to the maintenance and switching of rules that guide categorization (Maddox and Ashby, 2004; Ashby and Ennis, 2006). We trained two monkeys on a speed categorization task in which they categorized stimulus speed depending on the position of two different category boundaries (Figure 1A). Each boundary divided a set of random dot stimuli of 8 different speeds (2, 4, …, 16 deg/s) into ‘fast’ and ‘slow’ categories. On each trial, one of the boundary speeds (5 or 13 deg/s), selected randomly, was indicated by a visual cue at the beginning of the trial, prior to the motion stimulus. Therefore, depending on the visual cue, a particular speed of dot movement would switch from belonging to the fast or slow category. Two choice targets (red/green), the locations of which were randomized from trial to trial, were presented adjacent to the motion stimulus. Monkeys made saccades to the red target if they categorized the stimulus as ‘slow’ and to the green target if they categorized the stimulus as ‘fast’.10.7554/eLife.03727.003Figure 1.Behavioral task and performance.(A) Sequence of events in each trial of the speed categorization task. (B) Percentage of trials for which the stimulus speed was categorized as ‘fast’ for slow and fast boundary positions (orange/blue, respectively). Small circles represent choices from each session and large circles represent their average. Psychometric curves (solid lines) represent fits of Naka-Rushton functions together with the corresponding error rate (orange/blue dashed lines). (C) Histograms of PSEs from the psychometric curves across sessions sorted by the boundary position. PSE (i.e., the point of subjective equality) corresponds to the stimulus speed for which the animal was equally likely to classify the stimulus as ‘fast’ or ‘slow’. Triangles represent the mean PSEs corresponding to internal estimates for each boundary position. (D) Proportion of fixation breaks of the total number of trials (open circles, mean ± SEM) for each speed sorted by the boundary position.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.03727.003 We found that caudate neurons monitored flexible categorization behavior by providing distinct representation of decision-pertinent variables, from stimulus specific features to more cognitive signals reflecting internal estimates of decision variables. The monitoring signal in the caudate was not only accurate at representing ongoing behavior, but it also interpreted behavioral consequences in light of changing demands of the task. The accuracy of the monitoring signal was inversely related to behavioral proficiency, suggesting that the caudate nucleus allocates more efficient coding for changing and/or uncertain information critical for behavioral flexibility. These findings provide direct evidence for the role of the caudate nucleus in online monitoring of complex cognitive behavior, possibly allowing for contextually specific decisions to adapt to rapidly changing context (Daw et al., 2006; Hikosaka and Isoda, 2010; Pearson and Platt, 2013). Two adult male rhesus monkeys (Macaca mulatta, Monkey C: 8.2 kg and Monkey F: 11.5 kg) were used in the experiments. All ‘Materials and methods’ and treatments were in accordance with NIH guidelines and approved by the Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee at Columbia University and the New York State Psychiatric Institute. Prior to the experiments each animal was implanted with a scleral search coil, head post and recording chamber under aseptic conditions using isoflurane anesthesia. The animals received postoperative analgesics during postsurgical recovery. The positions of the recording chambers were guided by monkeys' individual MRI atlases. The recording chamber (20 mm in diameter) for Monkey C was placed on the scull over the arcuate sulcus positioned at stereotaxic coordinates 20 mm anterior and 15 mm lateral allowing access to the anterior caudate nucleus via the frontal eye fields (FEF). Monkey F was sequentially implanted with two different recording chambers. The first recording chamber (20 mm in diameter) was placed at 25 mm anterior and 18 mm lateral positioned over the acruate sulcus. The second recording chamber (20 × 30 mm oval) was centered at 15 mm anterior and 12 mm lateral. We used tungsten or glass coated electrodes with impedance ranging from 1-3.5 MΩ. The signals were amplified, filtered and passed to a real-time action potential detection. Action potentials were converted to TTL pulses that were stored together with the behavioral data. We also stored individual waveforms on each channel for further offline analysis. To identify the anterior caudate nucleus we used a number of criteria. We used depth measurements and identified the position of the caudate relative to the FEF. Also the dorsal edge of the caudate was identified by the presence of injury potentials. We identified the phasically active neurons by their low baseline activity (1-3 Hz). On each recording track we made sure to identify a tonically active neuron (4-8 Hz), in fact during some sessions we simultaneously recorded a pair of tonically and phasically active neurons. Post-saccade and reward neurons tended to be distributed without any distinct spatial organization in the associative caudate (Figure 2B). Monkeys were trained to sit in a primate chair for the duration of the experiments with their heads restrained. They performed behavioral experiments and received liquid reward for correctly executing the behavioral task.
In a dynamic environment an organism has to constantly adjust ongoing behavior to adapt to a given context. This process requires continuous monitoring of ongoing behavior to provide its meaningful interpretation. The caudate nucleus is known to have a role in behavioral monitoring, but the nature of these signals during dynamic behavior is still unclear. We recorded neuronal activity in the caudate nucleus in monkeys during categorization behavior that changed rapidly across contexts. We found that neuronal activity maintained representation of the identity and context of a recently categorized stimulus, as well as interpreted the behavioral meaningfulness of the maintained trace. The accuracy of this cognitive monitoring signal was highest for behavior for which subjects were prone to make errors. Thus, the caudate nucleus provides interpretive monitoring of ongoing behavior, which is necessary for contextually specific decisions to adapt to rapidly changing conditions.
The ability to adapt behavior in a changing environment is a hallmark of intelligent systems. From adjusting our driving speed to match road conditions to responding to a last-minute change of plans, mental flexibility underpins much of our day-to-day functioning.