 Our capacity to learn and reliably execute motor skills underlies much of what we do. Motor skill learning is characterized by high initial motor variability that is gradually reduced as performance improves and skills are consolidated (Figure 1A) (Lee et al., 1999; Park et al., 2013). Variability in motor output can be beneficial early in learning as it allows the motor system to explore a range of actions and selectively reinforce ones that improve performance (Sutton and Barto, 1998; Tumer and Brainard, 2007; Wu et al., 2014). But as viable solutions are found (a good tennis serve, for example), variability in motor output can become detrimental for expert performance and is often reduced. This capacity of the nervous system to regulate variability and plasticity in motor output as a function of learning or skill level enables new skills to be acquired and those already mastered to be stably expressed and maintained. However, the neural circuit mechanisms that regulate motor variability as a function of learning have not been identified.10.7554/eLife.03697.003Figure 1.Probing the neural mechanisms underlying the regulation of motor variability in songbirds.(A) A strong coupling between performance improvements and variability reduction is a hallmark of most forms of motor skill learning. (B) Spectral derivatives of songs from a single zebra finch at different stages of song learning (dph-days post hatch) show a reduction in vocal variability as a function of learning. (C) The neural circuits associated with the acquisition and execution of song. HVC (red) and RA (purple) constitute the cortical part of the vocal motor pathway (VMP) and control the learned song; the anterior forebrain pathway (AFP, green), is essential for inducing vocal variability and guiding the song learning process. (D) Presumed functional organization of the motor pathway in which HVC represents time in the song (t) in the form of a synaptic chain network and RA neurons control specific muscles. Learning in the motor pathway is thought to be driven by plasticity in RA that is guided by input from LMAN, the output of the AFP.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.03697.003 To characterize how inputs to RA change as a function of sensorimotor learning, we used birds of ages corresponding to three distinct phases of song learning (‘Materials and methods’, Figure 1B): (1) Subsong (40-45 days post-hatch, dph)—the earliest stage of sensorimotor learning characterized by highly variable songs driven largely by LMAN (Aronov et al., 2008); (2) Plastic song (60-65 dph)—an intermediate stage of development characterized by recognizable but variable song elements or syllables that are subject to further change; (3) Crystallized song (90-130 dph)—adult stage at which a stereotyped and stable version of the bird's courtship song has developed (Immelmann, 1969; Price, 1979). We set out to identify neural circuit mechanisms that regulate motor variability during motor skill learning. We used zebra finches as a model system because they learn a complex motor sequence, show very significant reduction in song variability with learning (Ölveczky et al., 2005; Ravbar et al., 2012), and have separate but converging neural pathways for controlling learned aspects of song (VMP) and for driving vocal variability and plasticity (AFP) (Figure 1). Using whole-cell patch-clamp recordings in acute brain slices we interrogated how inputs from these distinct pathways to neurons in motor cortex analogue RA change during song development (Figure 2). The 124 male zebra finches (Taeniopygia guttata) used for this study were obtained from our breeding colony. The care and experimental manipulation of the animals were carried out in accordance with guidelines of the National Institutes of Health and were reviewed and approved by the Harvard Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. Since our aim was to characterize how inputs to RA change as a function of sensorimotor learning, which in zebra finches takes place between ∼35-90 dph (Immelmann, 1969), we focused our experiments on birds in this age range. Our experimental subjects were divided into three age groups corresponding to three distinct stages of song learning: (i) subsong juveniles (40-45 dph), (ii) plastic-song juveniles (60-65 dph), and (iii) crystallized-song adults (90-130 dph).
Motor skill learning is characterized by improved performance and reduced motor variability. The neural mechanisms that couple skill level and variability, however, are not known. The zebra finch, a songbird, presents a unique opportunity to address this question because production of learned song and induction of vocal variability are instantiated in distinct circuits that converge on a motor cortex analogue controlling vocal output. To probe the interplay between learning and variability, we made intracellular recordings from neurons in this area, characterizing how their inputs from the functionally distinct pathways change throughout song development. We found that inputs that drive stereotyped song-patterns are strengthened and pruned, while inputs that induce variability remain unchanged. A simple network model showed that strengthening and pruning of action-specific connections reduces the sensitivity of motor control circuits to variable input and neural ‘noise’. This identifies a simple and general mechanism for learning-related regulation of motor variability.
‘Practice makes perfect’ captures the essence of how we learn new skills. When learning to play a musical instrument, for example, it often takes hours of practice before we can play a single piece of music properly for the first time. And as we get better, the variability in our performance—which is an advantage during the early stages of learning—becomes less. Likewise, songbirds need lots of practice in order to master the intricate songs they need to sing to attract mates.