 Vesicle fusion and transmitter release at synapses is a fundamentally important signaling mechanism that guarantees fast information transfer between neurons (Südhof, 2004). Interestingly, transmitter release is not static, but the amount of quanta released with each presynaptic action potential (AP) can vary dynamically, depending on the recent history of presynaptic activity. During high-frequency activity, short-term depression leads to a decrease of release in many synapses, but following recovery from depression, transmitter release can overshoot, giving rise to short-term enhancement of release. Various forms of short-term enhancement, like facilitation, augmentation and post-tetanic potentiation (PTP), have been observed and discriminated based on their duration (Magleby and Zengel, 1975; Zucker and Regehr, 2002). There is good evidence that the longer-lasting of these, augmentation and PTP, depend on the activation of intracellular second messengers in the nerve terminal, which in turn influence the release machinery. Previous studies have found evidence for a role of PKC during PTP, a form of short-term enhancement of release (Alle et al., 2001; Brager et al., 2003; Korogod et al., 2007; Fioravante et al., 2011). However, it remains possible that the requirement for PKC merely represents a background PKC activity permissive for the induction of PTP (see discussion in Korogod et al., 2007). We hypothesized that if PTP is caused by a dynamic phosphorylation/de-phosphorylation cycle of a presynaptic protein, phosphatase blockers should prolong the duration of PTP. Using a novel in vivo gene replacement strategy at a large CNS synapse, the calyx of Held, we show that PKC phosphorylation of the presynaptic protein Munc18-1 is critically important for PTP, a form of short-term enhancement observed at many CNS synapses. This identifies Munc18-1 as a presynaptic PKC target during PTP. Pharmacological experiments suggested that the PKC action during PTP is dynamic, since blocking phosphatases led to a marked prolongation of PTP (Figure 1). Together, these results show that a dynamic phosphorylation/de-phosphorylation cycle of Munc18-1, initiated by PKC activity, causes PTP. Protocols of animal experiments with mice and rats were approved by the Veterinary Office of the Canton of Vaud, Switzerland. For the experiments shown in Figures 3-5, Figure 3—figure supplements 1, 2, Figure 4—figure supplements 1, 2, we used floxed Munc18-1 mice (Heeroma et al., 2004) that were generated by insertion of loxP sites flanking exon 2 of the mouse Stxbp1 gene by homologous recombination in embryonic stem cells (Heeroma et al., 2004). Floxed Stxbp1 mice were bred to homozygosity and referred to as Munc18-1lox/lox mice.
Transmitter release at synapses is regulated by preceding neuronal activity, which can give rise to short-term enhancement of release like post-tetanic potentiation (PTP). Diacylglycerol (DAG) and Protein-kinase C (PKC) signaling in the nerve terminal have been widely implicated in the short-term modulation of transmitter release, but the target protein of PKC phosphorylation during short-term enhancement has remained unknown. Here, we use a gene-replacement strategy at the calyx of Held, a large CNS model synapse that expresses robust PTP, to study the molecular mechanisms of PTP. We find that two PKC phosphorylation sites of Munc18-1 are critically important for PTP, which identifies the presynaptic target protein for the action of PKC during PTP. Pharmacological experiments show that a phosphatase normally limits the duration of PTP, and that PTP is initiated by the action of a ‘conventional’ PKC isoform. Thus, a dynamic PKC phosphorylation/de-phosphorylation cycle of Munc18-1 drives short-term enhancement of transmitter release during PTP.
Brain function depends on the rapid transfer of information from one brain cell to the next at junctions known as synapses. Small packages called vesicles play an important role in this process. The arrival of an electrical action potential at the nerve terminal of the first cell causes some vesicles in the cell to fuse with the cell membrane, and this leads to the neurotransmitters inside the vesicles being released into the synapse. The neurotransmitters then bind to receptors on the second cell, which leads to an electrical signal in the second cell. A protein called Munc18-1 has a central role in the fusion of the vesicle at the cell membrane.