 There have been two frameworks suggested for the principal role of the hippocampus in memory: spatial memory and episodic memory (Scoville and Milner, 1957; O'Keefe and Nadel, 1978; Vargha-Khadem et al., 1997; Eichenbaum et al., 1999). During spatial behaviors, hippocampal pyramidal neurons discharge specifically at a certain location in the environment (the ‘place field'), suggesting that hippocampal neurons function in spatial memory (O'Keefe and Dostrovsky, 1971; McNaughton and Morris, 1987; Muller et al., 1987). In contrast, episodic memory provides a record of past experiences in relation to a broad range of materials (Wood et al., 1999) and is structured by spatial, temporal, and non-spatial contexts (Tulving, 1983). Recent studies indicate that on the basis of the pattern separation and completion proposed by Marr (Marr, 1969), the place field of a given neuron changes (remapping) relative to three different contexts: spatial context characterized by environmental features (Bostock et al., 1991; Kentros et al., 1998), spatiotemporal context (journey) affected by the experienced origin and expected destination (Frank et al., 2000; Wood et al., 2000), and internally and externally guided non-spatial context (task-demand) (Gothard et al., 1996; Anderson and Jeffery, 2003; Smith and Mizumori, 2006). Moreover, during a temporal gap between events, the place cells encode successive moments or fire at a specific part of an episode (Pastalkova et al., 2008; MacDonald et al., 2011). These lines of evidence suggest that the hippocampal place code is not only closely related to the ‘where' of episodic memory but also to the ‘when and how'. To test whether the changes and dynamics of the hippocampal place code are the neuronal basis of spatial and episodic-like memory, it is necessary to conduct a multifaceted experiment in which many hippocampal neurons are simultaneously monitored during repeated exposures to either spatiotemporal or non-spatial contexts in a constant spatial environment. Rats were trained to navigate their way through a figure ‘8' maze in a continuous task that incorporated both visual discrimination and two types of memory-guided responses (see ‘Materials and methods', Figure 1). The task was divided into three subtasks: visual discrimination (VD), non-delayed spatial alternation (SA) and delayed spatial alternation (DA). In the VD subtask, a cue light on the left or right side was illuminated to indicate which direction to turn at a decision point (DP, Figure 1A) to receive a reward (medial forebrain bundle [MFB] electrical stimulation). In both the SA and DA subtasks, cue lights on both sides were illuminated and the rats had to alternate between left and right at the decision point (Figure 1B). The difference between the SA and DA subtasks was that in the DA subtask, a barrier appeared at the middle of the central stem for 5 s to interpose a delay period. During the delay period, the rats paused steadily in the forward direction in front of the barrier. Some lines of evidence suggest that the SA-type task is often affected by hippocampal lesions (O'Keefe and Nadel, 1978). By contrast, a recent study implied that the SA-type task is independent on the hippocampus (Ainge et al., 2007b). Unlike the visually cued VD and procedural memory-guided SA subtasks, the episodic-like memory-guided DA type of task is critically dependent on the hippocampus (Ainge et al., 2007b; Ferbinteanu et al., 2011). The rats continuously performed these subtasks at least twice in a task over the course of approximately 1 hr (Figure 1D). This task allowed for examinations of the influence of internal and external events on hippocampal neuronal activity and hippocampus-dependence both between and within different journeys and task-demands.10.7554/eLife.00321.003Figure 1.Task configuration.(A) The rat has to decide which direction to turn at the decision point (DP). If correct, the rat gets reward signals (MFB stimulations) at one of the reward zones (RZ). In the DA subtask, a barrier appears for 5 s in the central stem (blue line) so that the rat has to wait in the delay zone (DZ). An example of a running trajectory of a rat (G111125) is superimposed on the maze. (B) Possible journeys for three subtasks. For the VD subtask, one of the light cues is illuminated to indicate a direction. For the memory-guided (SA and DA) subtasks, both of the light cues are illuminated to alternate the direction based on memory. (C) Examples of running trajectories of the rat (G111125). The red dots indicate the location of the onset of the estimated turn for each lap. (D) The subtask sequence in a task. Each subtask consisted of 20 laps, except the second VD subtask in each session, which only consisted of 10 laps.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.00321.003 To summarize, although the same prominent environmental features were encountered in the same locations, the spatial representation of the hippocampal CA1 at various points in the maze were dissimilar in both firing location and rate among different journeys, irrespective of either visually or mnemonically guided demands, in a global remapping manner. The result supports the view that hippocampal pyramidal cells show journey-dependent coding during internally or externally guided goal-directed behaviors (Ferbinteanu et al., 2011). However, when the rats experienced changes in prominent, non-spatial features with internal and external events (i.e., subtask differences), the hippocampus only modulated the journey-dependent activity by primarily changing the intensity of the firing rates. The latter finding indicates that the extent to which the place fields remap is demand-specific (Smith and Mizumori, 2006) in a rate remapping manner. Neither the journey-dependent nor demand-specific coding was chiefly influenced by the running speed, head direction, or lateral position. In addition to the evidence from the place field measurements, even when the given task-demands were different, the classifier could sufficiently predict the journey from the ensemble activity patterns, suggesting that the journey representation is generalized and that non-spatial demand-specific representation is hierarchically ranked at a lower level. The neuronal trajectory of the ensemble activity differed enough to classify any trial type; prior to its behavioral choice, significant accuracy could be achieved even in a visually-guided situation in which memory-guided decision could not be made. The neuronal ensemble code for distinguishing trial types in the hippocampal ensemble activity was relatively equal to that for journeys and task-demands. Thus, the results imply that based not only on externally induced but also internally generated events, the hippocampus processes the combination of journey and task-demand as a single episode. Five male Wister rats (300-400 g) were housed individually in cages (20 × 25 × 23 cm). All of them were implanted with a custom-made microdrive with 10 dodecatrodes and 2 reference electrodes. The rats were kept at 80% of free-feeding body weight. All rats were maintained on a 12-hr light/12-hr dark schedule. Testing occurred in the light phase.
The hippocampal system appears to be critically important in establishing episodic memory of both internal and external events within contexts as well as spatial memory, which enables flexible spatial navigation. However, the neuronal substrates that function across different memories in the hippocampal system are poorly understood. I monitored large-scale activity patterns of hippocampal neuronal ensembles in rats performing a novel, continuous task that combined one visually guided and two memory-guided types of navigations in a constant environment. I found that the activity patterns of the hippocampal ensemble represent spatiotemporal contexts (journeys) constructed by temporally ordered past, present and expected future places in tandem with visually or mnemonically guided non-spatial contexts (task-demands) to form episodes. This finding therefore suggests that the hierarchical organization of contexts based on pattern separation and completion enables the hippocampus to play a dual role in spatial navigation and recall of episodic memory.
A little over 10 years ago, researchers discovered that a brain region called the hippocampus is larger in London taxi drivers than it is in the general population. This tied in with results from animal studies, which had revealed a key role for the hippocampus in spatial navigation and memory. However, other work has shown that the hippocampus is equally important for remembering personal experiences—a form of memory known as episodic memory.