 A fundamental function of the human brain is to organize sensory events into distinct classes, that is, perceptual categorization (Rosch, 2007). This function is well illustrated in vision, the dominant sensory modality in humans: visual categorization in natural scenes occurs extremely rapidly (Thorpe et al., 1996) and in the near absence of attention (Li et al., 2002). Yet, visual categorization is extremely challenging. For instance, categorizing a visual stimulus as a face—arguably the most significant visual stimulus for human social ecology—requires to isolate the face from its natural background scene (‘figure-ground segregation’, Appelbaum et al., 2006; Peterson, 2014) and distinguish the face from the wide range of non-face stimuli in the environment which share visual properties with faces. Moreover, a common response (i.e., generalization) should be given to faces appearing under various viewing conditions (i.e., changes of head orientation, size, illumination, etc) and varying greatly in terms of gender, age, expression, ethnic origin, so on. Despite this challenge, human performance at face categorization is impressive (Crouzet et al., 2010), surpassing even the most sophisticated automatic systems (Scheirer et al., 2014). We recorded 32-electrode EEG in a group of 15 4- to 6-month-old infants (5 females, mean age = 155 days, range 125-197 days) looking at complex images of various faces and objects presented one-by-one on a computer screen at a rapid frequency rate of 6 images/s (i.e., 6 Hz, stimulus onset asynchrony of 167 ms, Figure 1A; Video 1), in sequences of 20 s. Infants viewed between 5 and 12 sequences (i.e., 100 s-240 s; eight sequences on average).10.7554/eLife.06564.003Figure 1.(A) Examples of face (F) and object (O) stimuli presented during a 20-s sequence at 6 Hz (i.e., 120 images).Face stimuli, varying considerably in size, viewpoint, expression, gender, so on appeared as every fifth image, that is, at 1.2 Hz rate (=6 Hz/5). For copyright reasons, the face pictures displayed in the figure are different than those used in the actual experiment, but the degree of variability across images is respected. The full set of face pictures is available at http://face-categorization-lab.webnode.com/publications/ together with the paper reporting the original study performed in adults (Rossion et al., 2015). (B) Stimuli were presented in the center of the screen by means of sinusoidal contrast modulation at a rate of 6 Hz (i.e., 6 images/s).DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.06564.00310.7554/eLife.06564.004Video 1.8 s excerpt of experiment 1 (20 s sequences) showing faces at a rate of 1 image every 5 images, at a 6 Hz base rate.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.06564.004 Collectively, the findings of Experiments 1 and 2 demonstrate that the infant right hemisphere discriminates natural photographs of faces from non-face objects of multiple categories and generalizes across face photographs despite their high physical variability. In both experiments, faces are temporally embedded in a rapid stimulation sequence of non-face objects, so that there is an inherent comparison, or contrast, without the need to perform a subtraction between conditions recorded at different times. That is, there is an oddball response only because the face is discriminated from all other object categories, activating a (face-)specific population of neurons at a rate of 1.2 Hz. Although this is unlikely, we cannot formally exclude at this stage that another visual category than faces would be represented by a distinct population of neurons and would therefore also elicit an oddball response of this amplitude at 4-6 months of age. However, to our knowledge, there is no other visual category that elicits such a large specific response, with a right hemisphere advantage, in the human adult brain. Moreover, the face is arguably the most frequent and socially relevant stimulus in the human (infant) visual environment, making it the best candidate for the early development of category-selective responses. Nineteen full-term 4- to 6-month-old infants completed Experiment 1 approved by the Biomedical Ethical Committee from the University of Louvain (Belgian number: B403201215103). Their parents gave written informed consent and none of them reported their infant suffering from any psychiatric or neurological disorders. The data of one infant were excluded because of large artifacts recorded at one channel of interest (P8) during the whole experiment. Three infants paid fully attention only to one sequence and were therefore excluded from the study. Thus, the final sample consisted of 15 healthy full-term 4- to 6-month-old infants (10 males, mean age = 155 days, SE = 6 days). Note that a rejection rate of 4 datasets out of 19 is extremely low compared to typical EEG studies run with infants of that age, requiring much longer testing durations and a data rejection rate of at least 50% (e.g., de Haan and Nelson, 1999).
Human performance at categorizing natural visual images surpasses automatic algorithms, but how and when this function arises and develops remain unanswered. We recorded scalp electrical brain activity in 4-6 months infants viewing images of objects in their natural background at a rapid rate of 6 images/second (6 Hz). Widely variable face images appearing every 5 stimuli generate an electrophysiological response over the right hemisphere exactly at 1.2 Hz (6 Hz/5). This face-selective response is absent for phase-scrambled images and therefore not due to low-level information. These findings indicate that right lateralized face-selective processes emerge well before reading acquisition in the infant brain, which can perform figure-ground segregation and generalize face-selective responses across changes in size, viewpoint, illumination as well as expression, age and gender. These observations made with a highly sensitive and objective approach open an avenue for clarifying the developmental course of natural image categorization in the human brain.
Putting names to faces can sometimes be challenging, but humans are generally extremely good at recognising faces. Computers, on the other hand, often find it difficult to categorize a face as a face. Indeed, a major challenge in face recognition arises because faces come in many different shapes and sizes. Moreover, both the lighting conditions and the orientation of the head can change, which makes the challenge even more difficult.