 Frequency structure (spectral composition) and temporal modulation rate are fundamental dimensions of natural sounds. The topographical representation of frequency (tonotopy) is a well-established organisational principle of the auditory system. In mammals, tonotopy is established in the receptor organ, the cochlea, and maintained as a systematic spatial separation of different frequencies in different areas of the ascending auditory pathway, and in the auditory cortex. While temporal modulation is recognised as an essential perceptual component of communication sounds such as human speech and animal vocalisations (Rosen, 1992; Drullman et al., 1994; Shannon et al., 1995; Wang, 2000; Chi et al., 2005; Elliott and Theunissen, 2009), its representation in the auditory system is poorly understood. In contrast to sound frequency, amplitude modulation rate is not spatially organised in the cochlea but represented in the temporal dynamics of neuronal firing patterns. However, a considerable proportion of neurons in the auditory brainstem and cortex show tuning to amplitude modulation rates (reviewed in Joris et al., 2004). It has been proposed that temporal information in sound is extracted by amplitude modulation filter banks (Dau et al., 1997a, 1997b) that are physiologically instantiated in the midbrain (Rees and Langner, 2005). Studies in rodents (Langner et al., 2002), cats (Schreiner and Langner, 1988) and primates (Baumann et al., 2011) have shown that at the stage of the inferior colliculus amplitude modulation rate and frequency of sound are represented in approximately orthogonal topographical maps. In a first experiment we recorded the BOLD response to amplitude-modulated broad-band noise at six different rates (0.5, 2, 8, 32, 128, 512 Hz, see also [Baumann et al., 2011]) across the auditory cortex of three monkeys. We generated two different maps to reveal the spatial organisation of modulation rate by projecting the data of the acquired volumes onto the cortical surface derived from the anatomical scans. In a first map (contrast map) we contrasted the response strength of the lower rate bands vs the higher rate bands to reveal the gradual change of preference for higher to lower modulation rates across the auditory cortex (Figure 1, top panels). The data corresponding to the two highest rates (512 Hz, 128 Hz) and lowest rates (2 Hz, 0.5 Hz) were combined before contrasting, while the intermediate rates were ignored (see also Baumann et al., 2011). In a second map (best-rate map), for each position in the auditory cortex, we represented the rate band that showed the strongest response. For the best-rate maps, all six individual rates were mapped (Figure 1, bottom panels). The contrast maps reveal a topography for different amplitude modulation rates with preferences for high rates consistently clustered in the postero-medial auditory cortex with the maxima at the medial border of the primary field A1 in both hemispheres of all tested animals. Preferences for low rates were located lateral, anterior and to some degree posterior to the high-rate clusters. In the areas with the maximal preference for low or high rates, the contrast between low and high rates was statistically significant (p < 0.05) in all animals and hemispheres, corrected for multiple comparisons with family-wise error (FWE) correction over the recorded volume. The best-modulation-rate maps for the six tested rates (Figure 1, bottom) confirmed the systematic organisation of the response pattern with a topographic representation of rate arranged in approximately concentric frequency bands starting with high rates in the postero-medial auditory cortex (at least a few voxels showed a best modulation rate of 128 Hz postero-medially in 5 of 6 hemispheres) and progressing anterior, lateral and in some cases posterior to lower rates (see also the schemata in Figure 4). The highest rate (512 Hz) was hardly represented in the best-rate maps.10.7554/eLife.03256.003Figure 1.Representation of amplitude modulation rates in the auditory cortex.Top panels: map showing contrast of low vs high rates (rate contrast map) projected on rendered surfaces of the superior temporal planes in three animals (M1-3). Green arrows indicate mean gradient direction of the contrast in auditory field A1 (gradient directions derived from 2D regression; see also Table 1). Green circles indicate the position of the centre of mass of A1. Bottom panels: map of preferred response to different rates (Best-rate map). A; anterior, P; posterior, L; left, R; right.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.03256.003 Here we demonstrate for the first time a systematic and topographic representation of amplitude modulation rate in the auditory cortex of non-human primates. Concentric bands of decreasing rates extend bilaterally from the medial auditory cortex in anterior, lateral and posterior directions. In the region of the auditory core areas, the modulation gradients cross the well-established frequency gradients in approximately perpendicular direction leading to an orthogonal representation of the temporal and spectral dimensions of sound. This organisation increasingly breaks down in extra-core auditory fields that tend to show a preference for slow rates. The topographical maps for temporal modulations are largely symmetrical across the hemispheres showing no signs of a consistent lateralisation for temporal features. The data were obtained from three male macaque monkeys (Macaca mulatta) weighting 9-16 kg. Animals were implanted with a headholder under general anaesthesia and sterile conditions as described in detail previously (Thiele et al., 2006). Before scanning, the animals were habituated to the scanner environment. A custom-made primate chair was used to position the animal in the vertical bore of the scanner and head movements were minimised with a head holder. Details of the positioning procedures are given in (Baumann et al., 2010). All experiments were carried out in accordance with the UK, Animals (Scientific Procedures) Act (1986), European Communities Council Directive 1986 (86/609/EEC) and the US National Institutes of Health Guidelines for the Care and Use of Animals for Experimental Procedures, and were performed with great care to ensure the well-being of the animals.
Natural sounds can be characterised by their spectral content and temporal modulation, but how the brain is organized to analyse these two critical sound dimensions remains uncertain. Using functional magnetic resonance imaging, we demonstrate a topographical representation of amplitude modulation rate in the auditory cortex of awake macaques. The representation of this temporal dimension is organized in approximately concentric bands of equal rates across the superior temporal plane in both hemispheres, progressing from high rates in the posterior core to low rates in the anterior core and lateral belt cortex. In A1 the resulting gradient of modulation rate runs approximately perpendicular to the axis of the tonotopic gradient, suggesting an orthogonal organisation of spectral and temporal sound dimensions. In auditory belt areas this relationship is more complex. The data suggest a continuous representation of modulation rate across several physiological areas, in contradistinction to a separate representation of frequency within each area.
The arrival of sound waves at the ear causes the fluid inside a part of the ear known as the cochlea to vibrate. These vibrations are detected by tiny hair cells and transformed into electrical signals, which travel along the auditory nerve to the brain. After processing in the brainstem and other regions deep within the brain, the signals reach a region called the auditory cortex, where they undergo further processing.