 The life cycle of the nematode Caenorhabditis elegans is comprised of the embryonic stage, four larval stages termed L1-L4, and adulthood. Each larval stage lasts 8-12 hr at 20°C, and under standard conditions, and ends with a molt, when epidermal cells synthesize a new cuticle and the old one is shed. Although C. elegans larvae are mostly continuously motile, each molt is accompanied by a 2-3 hr period of behavioral quiescence (Singh and Sulston, 1978), referred to as ‘lethargus’. Thus, the larval stages can be divided into motile intermolt sub-stages (L1int-L4int) and their corresponding lethargus sub-stages (L1leth-L4leth). However, behavior during distinct developmental sub-stages (Singh and Sulston, 1978) has not previously been examined in detail. Specifically, both the modulation of body posture and locomotion on developmental timescales remain largely unexplored. To assay the modulation of behavior during development, we developed PyCelegans: a high-speed, modular image-processing tool for analyzing posture and locomotion of C. elegans on high performance computing resources. The function we used for processing a single frame was limited to tracking a single animal. However, the modular design of PyCelegans can accommodate multi-animal tracking once an appropriate substitute for this function is implemented, without further changes. The rate of data capture for recording throughout a larval developmental stage at a sufficiently high temporal resolution can exceed 3,000,000 images per day. For a dataset of this magnitude, the required post-processing is the rate-limiting step of the experiment. Using PyCelegans, the rate-limiting component of the analysis scaled linearly with the number of available processing-cores. By using 256 cores we achieved a speed-up of two orders of magnitude relative to previous implementations. For proof of principle, analyses have been run on up to 1024 processors. The number of processors that could be utilized, for example, from publically available clusters, is in the tens of thousands for a single dataset. Changes to neural circuits induced by experience or development can occur on timescales of hours to months. Neuromodulators such as biogenic amines or neuropeptides often act on such long timescales, modifying the output of neural circuits by altering the activity of neurons and affecting synaptic connections (Bargmann, 2012; Marder, 2012). Yet there are few techniques for tracking long-term physiological and behavioral dynamics and mostly offer limited resolution (Clark et al., 2010; Fonio et al., 2012; Hart, 2006). Counter-intuitively, despite the simplicity of invertebrate models, detailed longitudinal studies designed to follow their behavioral trends across development are rare as well. C. elegans strains were maintained and grown according to standard protocols (Brenner, 1974). The wild-type strain used was C. elegans variety Bristol, strain N2. The following mutant strains were obtained from the Caenorhabditis Genetics Center: KG518 acy-1 (ce2) III (gf), KG532 kin- 2(ce179) X, CB169 unc-31(e169) IV, KP1182 acy- 1(nu329) III (lf) and YT17 crh-1(tz2) III.
Despite their simplicity, longitudinal studies of invertebrate models are rare. We thus sought to characterize behavioral trends of Caenorhabditis elegans, from the mid fourth larval stage through the mid young adult stage. We found that, outside of lethargus, animals exhibited abrupt switching between two distinct behavioral states: active wakefulness and quiet wakefulness. The durations of epochs of active wakefulness exhibited non-Poisson statistics. Increased Gαs signaling stabilized the active wakefulness state before, during and after lethargus. In contrast, decreased Gαs signaling, decreased neuropeptide release, or decreased CREB activity destabilized active wakefulness outside of, but not during, lethargus. Taken together, our findings support a model in which protein kinase A (PKA) stabilizes active wakefulness, at least in part through two of its downstream targets: neuropeptide release and CREB. However, during lethargus, when active wakefulness is strongly suppressed, the native role of PKA signaling in modulating locomotion and quiescence may be minor.
The roundworm C. elegans is a key model organism in neuroscience. It has a simple nervous system, made up of just 302 neurons, and was the first multicellular organism to have its genome fully sequenced. The lifecycle of C. elegans begins with an embryonic stage, followed by four larval stages and then adulthood, and worms can progress through this cycle in only three days. However, relatively little is known about how the behaviour of the worms varies across these distinct developmental phases.