 The primary cilium provides a unique cellular compartment for interaction with the extracellular milieu. Initiated by discoveries in chemosensation in Caenorhabditis elegans, of ciliary defects in polycystic kidney disease, and of the central role of cilia in the vertebrate hedgehog (Hh) signaling pathway, we now know that the organelle is a signaling node for multiple pathways in development, disease, and homeostasis (reviewed in Gerdes et al., 2009; Lancaster and Gleeson, 2009; Goetz and Anderson, 2010). Although the signaling functions of the ciliary membrane are crucial for development and homeostasis, we are just beginning to learn the cellular and molecular mechanisms that underlie the dynamic regulation of ciliary membrane protein composition in existing cilia during cilium-generated signaling (Pazour and Bloodgood, 2008; Nachury et al., 2010; Hu and Nelson, 2011; Malicki and Avidor-Reiss, 2014). The presence in Chlamydomonas of only a single cytoplasmic dynein, cytoplasmic dynein 1b, and our previous results that cytoplasmic microtubules participated in periciliary accumulation and ciliary entry of SAG1-C65 during signaling raised the possibility that this microtubule minus end-directed IFT motor (Pazour et al., 1999) might participate in SAG1-C65 redistribution. The benzoyl dihydroquinazolinone, ciliobrevin D, has been shown in metazoans to block cytoplasmic dyneins (Hyman et al., 2009; Firestone et al., 2012; Ye et al., 2013). And, recently Shih et al. (2013) showed that ciliobrevin D inhibition of Chlamydomonas cytoplasmic dynein 1b (DHC1b) strongly reduced retrograde IFT. We tested for a role of the retrograde IFT motor in SAG1-C65 redistribution during signaling using ciliobrevin D. Early during ciliary adhesion and cilium-generated signaling, activation of a ciliary adenylyl cyclase leads to an ∼15-fold increase in cellular cAMP that activates gametes to prepare for fusion. Thus, it is possible to study cellular events activated by the signaling pathway, such as redistribution of the agglutinin polypeptide, release of cell walls, and upregulation of transcripts for gamete-specific proteins, in gametes of a single mating type by incubating them in the cell-permeable analogue, db-cAMP (Pijst et al., 1984b; Pasquale and Goodenough, 1987; Goodenough, 1989; Hunnicutt et al., 1990; Belzile et al., 2013; Ning et al., 2013). We incubated SAG1-HA/sag1-5 gametes (which express a tagged SAG1-C65 polypeptide, SAG1-C65-HA) (Belzile et al., 2013) with and without ciliobrevin D for 20 min, activated them by addition of db-cAMP for 5 min in the continued presence of the inhibitor, and then assessed SAG1-C65-HA localization. We report here that membrane protein trafficking through the cilium during cilium-generated signaling in Chlamydomonas is uni-directional and depends on the concerted action of two cellular processes, protein delivery to the ciliary base by the retrograde IFT motor, cytoplasmic dynein 1b, and shedding of a unique ciliary membrane compartment in the form of ciliary ectosomes. Use of both a retrograde IFT motor mutant, fla24 and the cytoplasmic dynein 1b inhibitor, ciliobrevin D, showed that the signaling-triggered rapid polarization of SAG1-C65-HA and its entry into the ciliary membrane were inhibited when motor function was impaired (Figure 1). Thus, the retrograde IFT motor transports SAG1-C65-HA from distal cellular membrane sites to the periciliary region, either within the plasma membrane or as vesicles within the cytoplasm. The increased amounts of SAG1-C65-HA in the cilia of resting fla24 gametes (Figure 1F,G) also indicated that the retrograde motor is important for membrane protein trafficking during the ciliogenesis that accompanies gamete formation. In their studies of a conditional DHC1b mutant, dhc1b-3, Engel et al. (2012) found several differences in ciliary protein composition compared to wild-type. Whether the increased amount of SAG1-C65-HA in the fla24 cilia reflects a direct or indirect role for the retrograde motor in regulating ciliary membrane protein composition is unclear (Kim et al., 2009; Ocbina et al., 2011). Although several membrane-associated proteins and protein complexes are strongly implicated in targeting ciliary membrane proteins to the periciliary region in many cell types (Nachury et al., 2010; Wood and Rosenbaum, 2014), the motors that carry ciliary-destined membrane proteins to the base of the organelle have been largely unidentified. One notable exception is photoreceptor cells in which cytoplasmic dynein 1 (not the retrograde IFT motor) is involved in trafficking of rod outer segment membrane proteins from the golgi to the base of the connecting cilium (Tai et al., 1999; Kong et al., 2013). Chlamydomonas reinhardtii strains 21gr (mating type plus; CC-1690), 6145C (mating type minus; CC-1691), and the fusion-defective minus strain hap2 are available from the Chlamydomonas Genetics Center, University of Minnesota, St. Paul. A SAG1-HA transgene was introduced into the ciliary adhesion mutant mt+/sag1-5 as previously described (Belzile et al., 2013). Staurosporine, cycloheximide, dibutyryl-cAMP, and poly-l-lysine were from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO) and ciliobrevin D was from Calbiochem (Darmstadt, Germany). Dhc1b mutant fla24 plus cells expressing SAG1-HA were obtained from a cross between fla24 minus gametes and SAG1-HA/sag1-5 plus gametes.
The role of the primary cilium in key signaling pathways depends on dynamic regulation of ciliary membrane protein composition, yet we know little about the motors or membrane events that regulate ciliary membrane protein trafficking in existing organelles. Recently, we showed that cilium-generated signaling in Chlamydomonas induced rapid, anterograde IFT-independent, cytoplasmic microtubule-dependent redistribution of the membrane polypeptide, SAG1-C65, from the plasma membrane to the periciliary region and the ciliary membrane. Here, we report that the retrograde IFT motor, cytoplasmic dynein 1b, is required in the cytoplasm for this rapid redistribution. Furthermore, signaling-induced trafficking of SAG1-C65 into cilia is unidirectional and the entire complement of cellular SAG1-C65 is shed during signaling and can be recovered in the form of ciliary ectosomes that retain signal-inducing activity. Thus, during signaling, cells regulate ciliary membrane protein composition through cytoplasmic action of the retrograde IFT motor and shedding of ciliary ectosomes.
Nearly every cell in the human body has slender, hair-like structures known as cilia that project outwards from its surface. These structures can sense and respond to light, chemicals and touch, and they are required for normal development. Failure of cilia to form or function in the correct manner can lead to severe diseases—such as kidney disorders, deafness and loss of vision. A major puzzle for researchers who study cilia has been to understand how cells change the composition of these structures as part of their response to a sensory input.