 Mitochondria are double membrane-bound organelles whose shape is instrumental to their function in diverse cellular processes such as metabolism and apoptosis (Labbe et al., 2014). The inner mitochondrial membrane has the highest density of protein in the cell and is differentiated into three distinct interconnected domains: the boundary region, which are flattened membranes that lie in close apposition to the outer membrane; cristae membranes, which are lamellar invaginations with highly curved edges; and cristae junctions, which are relatively narrow tubules that connect cristae to the boundary membrane and may act as a physical partitioning mechanism that prevents and/or regulates the intermixing of proteins between cristae and the boundary domains (Mannella et al., 1994). Compositionally, the boundary membrane is enriched for import and assembly machinery for the mitochondrial proteome (Vogel et al., 2006; Wurm and Jakobs, 2006). In contrast, cristae membranes house assembled electron transport chain protein complexes and ATP synthase, which function together to synthesize ATP via oxidative phosphorylation. Specific combinations of electron transport chain complexes further assemble into large mega-Dalton supercomplexes in cristae in a manner dependent on the mitochondrial lipid cardiolipin and act to facilitate electron transport, and likely as diffusion traps to promote their sorting into cristae (Cruciat et al., 2000; Zhang et al., 2002; Pfeiffer et al., 2003; Acehan et al., 2011; Lapuente-Brun et al., 2013; Wilkens et al., 2013). ATP synthase also assembles in a regulated manner into dimers and dimer oligomers, whose unique structure generates and/or stabilizes the high curvature at the edges of lamellar cristae (Abrahams et al., 1994; Paumard et al., 2002; Strauss et al., 2008). To address the functional roles and organization of MICOS, we generated a yeast strain lacking all core MICOS components using a Cre-lox recombination system, which allowed for sequential MICOS subunit gene deletion and selection marker rescue (Guldener et al., 1996). Using this approach, we constructed ∆MICOS—a strain containing ‘clean,’ unmarked deletions of all six MICOS genes. In contrast to single MICOS subunit deletions, ∆MICOS cells displayed a severe respiratory growth defect, as assessed by growth on the non-fermentable carbon source, glycerol (Figure 1A, right panel). Importantly, reintroduction of four of six MICOS genes at their native loci complemented the growth defect, validating the ∆MICOS strain (Figure 1A). The mitochondrial morphology defect of the ∆MICOS strain, as assessed by fluorescence microscopy using the matrix-targeted fluorescent protein, mito-DsRed, was also more penetrant as compared to mitochondria in individual MICOS deletion cells (Figure 1B). Although the predominant lamellar shape phenotype present in single MICOS deletion mutants was observed (56% of ∆mic60 cells vs 21% of ∆MICOS cells), a majority of ∆MICOS cells also had bulbous mitochondrial structures with a beads on a string appearance, and hollow, large spherical structures that were sometimes continuous with the bulbous structures (11% of ∆mic60 cells vs 59% of ∆MICOS cells) (Figure 1C). These spherical structures are consistent with what have previously observed in a relatively small fraction of ∆mic60 cells (Itoh et al., 2013). EM analysis of ∆MICOS cells revealed mitochondrial features analogous to those observed by fluorescence microscopy, including extended lamellar cristae, septated inner membranes, mitochondria with larger diameter structures, and hollow mitochondria, respectively (Figure 1D).10.7554/eLife.07739.003Figure 1.The MICOS complex is required for oxidative phosphorylation and normal mitochondrial ultrastructure and morphology.(A) Serial dilutions of the indicated yeast cells were plated on media containing glucose (left) and the non-fermentable carbon source, glyercol (right). (B) Mitochondrial morphology in the indicated strains was determined by imaging cells expressing the matrix marker mito-dsRed. Z-projections of confocal fluorescence images are shown, except for the right panel of ∆MICOS, which is a single plane. (C) Quantification of mitochondrial morphologies from cells imaged as in (B) were categorized. Approximately 100 cells from three independent experiments were quantified and data are represented as mean ± SEM. (D) Representative electron microscopy images are shown of chemically fixed yeast cells from the indicated strains. (E) Confocal fluorescence microscopy z-projections of cells from the indicated strains expressing mito-DsRed and the functional nucleoid marker Rim1-GFP are shown. The arrow marks aggregation of Rim1-GFP in a ∆MICOS cell. Scale bars: (B) 2 μm; (D) 500 nm; (E) 3 μm. See also Figure 1—figure supplement 1.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.07739.00310.7554/eLife.07739.004Figure 1—figure supplement 1.Rim1 is a functional marker of nucleoids.(A) Serial dilutions of the wild type yeast and those expressing Rim1-GFP integrated at the trp1 locus plated on media containing glucose (left) and the non-fermentable carbon source, glyercol (right). (B) Z-projections of confocal fluorescence microscopy images of wild type rho+ (top) and rho0 (bottom) cells expressing Rim1-GFP and the mitochondrial matrix marker, mito-DsRed. Scale bar: 3 μm.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.07739.004 Our analysis indicates that MICOS consists of two subcomplexes, which localize to cristae junctions (Figure 7F). Examination of the assembly pathways for each subcomplex has illuminated their relative roles in cristae biogenesis. The Mic27/Mic12/Mic10 subcomplex is dependent on the inner membrane phospholipid cardiolipin and on the expression of respiratory complexes. The second MICOS subcomplex consists of a Mic60 multimer, which assembles in a manner independent of cardiolipin, respiratory complexes, and other MICOS proteins. Although each subcomplex assembles independently, the cardiolipin- and respiratory complex-independent nature of Mic60 assemblies suggest that there is a hierarchical nature to MICOS assembly, where Mic60 functions upstream of the Mic27/Mic10/Mic12 subcomplex in MICOS assembly. In this context, we observed Mic60 assemblies in cells without mtDNA, which lack detectable cristae by electron microscopic analysis. These observations suggest that Mic60 assemblies direct the position of nascent cristae junction sites. All yeast strains described were constructed in the W303 genetic background (ade2-1; leu2-3; his3-11, 15; trp1-1; ura3-1; can1-100). All deletions (except those used to generate the ∆MICOS strain, see below) were generated using PCR-based homologous recombination replacing the entire ORF of targeted genes with the kanMX6, HIS3MX6, or NatMX6 cassettes (Longtine et al., 1998; Schuldiner et al., 2006). All C-terminal tags were generated using PCR-based targeted homologous recombination using the following cassettes, and are referred to throughout the text using the description in parentheses: GFP(S65T)::HIS3MX6 (GFP), yEGFP::Kan (EGFP), yEGFP::SpHIS5 (EGFP), yEGFP::CaURA3 (EGFP), 3x-yEGFP::CaURA3 (3x-EGFP), ymCherry::HIS3MX6 (mCherry), ymCherry::Kan (mCherry), and 3xFLAG::HIS3MX6 (FLAG) (Longtine et al., 1998; Sheff and Thorn, 2004; Hoppins et al., 2011; Graef et al., 2013). All yeast transformations were performed by the lithium acetate method and transformants were selected on the appropriate media and verified by PCR, and where appropriate, gene expression. Haploid strains containing multiple tags, deletions, or combinations thereof were generated either by mating and sporulation, or by sequential PCR-based homologous recombination. Rho0 versions of strains were generated by growth in YPD containing 25 μg/ml ethidium bromide for ∼48 hr.
The conserved MICOS complex functions as a primary determinant of mitochondrial inner membrane structure. We address the organization and functional roles of MICOS and identify two independent MICOS subcomplexes: Mic27/Mic10/Mic12, whose assembly is dependent on respiratory complexes and the mitochondrial lipid cardiolipin, and Mic60/Mic19, which assembles independent of these factors. Our data suggest that MICOS subcomplexes independently localize to cristae junctions and are connected via Mic19, which functions to regulate subcomplex distribution, and thus, potentially also cristae junction copy number. MICOS subunits have non-redundant functions as the absence of both MICOS subcomplexes results in more severe morphological and respiratory growth defects than deletion of single MICOS subunits or subcomplexes. Mitochondrial defects resulting from MICOS loss are caused by misdistribution of respiratory complexes in the inner membrane. Together, our data are consistent with a model where MICOS, mitochondrial lipids and respiratory complexes coordinately build a functional and correctly shaped mitochondrial inner membrane.
Structures called mitochondria provide energy that cells need to live and grow. To do this, mitochondria convert energy stored within sugars and other carbon-rich compounds into the energy currency of cells, a molecule called adenosine triphosphate (called ATP for short). Defective mitochondria can cause cells to starve and also cause severe human diseases.