 The integrin adhesome contains more than hundred proteins with multiple binding sites for each other (Zamir and Geiger, 2001; Zaidel-Bar et al., 2007; Byron et al., 2011; Kuo et al., 2011; Schiller et al., 2011; Geiger and Zaidel-Bar, 2012). Upon local signals, components of the integrin adhesome get self-assembled along the plasma membrane to form nascent adhesion sites and to further mature them to focal complexes and focal adhesions (Zamir and Geiger, 2001; Cukierman et al., 2002; Gardel et al., 2010; Zaidel-Bar and Geiger, 2010). These adhesion sites assemble, disassemble, and change their molecular content by exchanging their components with the surrounding cytosol (Wolfenson et al., 2011; Lavelin et al., 2013). Likewise, stationary adhesion sites are dynamically maintained by a balanced rapid exchange of constituents with the cytosol (Lele et al., 2008; Wolfenson et al., 2011; Lavelin et al., 2013). Considering the molecular diversity and complexity of cell-matrix adhesion sites (Zamir et al., 1999; Zamir and Geiger, 2001; Cukierman et al., 2002; Zamir et al., 2008), a major question is how can the integrin adhesome form these structures rapidly, locally, and correctly. In order to approach this question it is essential to consider and examine not only the adhesion sites themselves but also the state of their components in the cytosolic pool. However, the study of this fundamental aspect was largely abandoned so far, due to tacitly conceiving the cytosolic pool as a passive supply of individual integrin adhesome proteins. In this work we challenged this view by systematic FCCS and FRAP measurements. Strikingly, we found that the integrin adhesome is actually extensively pre-assembled already in the cytosol, forming multi-protein building blocks that can facilitate rapid and modular assembly of adhesion sites. The physical associations between adhesion site components are spatially uniform around stationary focal adhesions, indicating that these sites exchange their building blocks with the cytosol without altering them (i.e., symmetrically). Together, our results lead to a concept in which self-assembly of adhesion sites involves recruitment of multi-protein modules and symmetric exchange preserves the specifications of these building blocks in the cytosolic pool, thereby facilitating correct self-assembly. We first asked whether the integrin adhesome forms in the cytosol pre-assembled multi-protein building blocks for adhesion sites. To address this question we selected 13 key components of adhesion sites—α-actinin, α-parvin, p130CAS (CAS), CSK, FAK, ILK, paxillin, PINCH, talin, tensin, VASP, vinculin, and zyxin—and quantified systematically all 91 possible pairwise physical associations between them in the cytosol of REF52 cells using FCCS (Figure 1). The sensitivity of FCCS enabled to perform these measurements at low concentrations of ectopically expressed proteins, comparable to the range of typical endogenous concentrations (Figure 1—figure supplement 1). The obtained data was analyzed to derive for each measurement the association score, which weights the cross-correlation amplitude by its noise, and the apparent Ka that considers also the auto-correlation curves to quantify the apparent association strength (‘Materials and methods’). The overall distribution of the association scores was skewed to the right as compared to the negative-control measurements (Figure 1B, top), indicating the presence of physical associations between some of the analyzed proteins in the cytosol. These positive measurements resulted from a subset of the 91 protein pairs (Figure 1B). Among the 91 possible pairing combinations, 18 protein pairs were found to be physically associated with a p-value <0.0001 (Figure 1C,D; Supplementary file 1). Among these pairs, 15 pairs were found to be physically associated also in the cytosol of another cell line, NIH3T3, with a p-value <0.02 (Figure 1E; Supplementary file 1). These results show a strikingly extensive degree of physical associations between adhesion site components in the cytosol. This indicates that the assembly of adhesion sites is plausibly carried out by recruitment of pre-assembled multi-protein building blocks, rather than of individual proteins.10.7554/eLife.02257.003Figure 1.Extensive physical associations between components of cell-matrix adhesion sites in the cytosol.(A) Pairwise physical associations between proteins tagged with meGFP and TDmKate2 were measured in the cytosol of REF52 and NIH3T3 cells using FCCS (schematized). From these measurements the apparent association constants (Ka) and the association scores were derived as described. (B) Top, area-normalized distributions of association scores between meGFP and TDmKate2 alone (i.e., negative control, n = 126 cells, red line) and between the different analyzed components of adhesion sites in all individual valid measurements performed in REF52 cells (n = 1914 cells; green line) with their corresponding medians (vertical lines). Middle, the distribution of median association score of the 91 protein pairs (60 ≥ n ≥ 9 cells per each pair). Red line indicates the median association score of the negative control. Bottom, the total number of pairs with a median association score bigger than that of the negative control at different statistical confidences (Supplementary file 1). The p-values indicate the probability that the observed median association score of a given pair is bigger than that of the negative control by coincidence. Thus a higher −log(p-value threshold) value means a higher statistical confidence for physical association. (C) A heatmap indicating the p-value of each protein pair in REF52 cells. (D) A bar plot showing the median plus-minus median absolute deviation (MAD) Ka for protein pairs having p-value <0.0001 (n ≥ 13 cells per pair). (E) The network of physical associations between the analyzed proteins. Shown edges are those having p-value <0.0001 in REF52 and p-value <0.02 in NIH3T3 (Supplementary file 1). Edges color and width indicate p-value categories as in (C) and proportionally Ka in REF52, respectively. (F) Based on the network shown in (E), two potential ternary complexes are indicated. (G) Mutually exclusive physical associations inferred from (D) and (E) as cases in which two or more proteins exhibit pairwise associations with another protein but not between themselves.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.02257.00310.7554/eLife.02257.004Figure 1—figure supplement 1.Concentrations of the ectopically expressed proteins in the FCCS measured cells.The area plot shows the distribution of concentrations of the TDmKate2 and meGFP tagged proteins within the FCCS analyzed cells (n = 1914 cells co-expressing pairwise the analyzed integrin adhesome protein and 126 cells co-expressing the negative control TDmKate2 and meGFP). These concentrations were derived by fitting the red and green autocorrelation curves to a single component diffusion model and dividing the obtained number of particles by the red and green confocal volumes (‘Materials and methods’). For comparison, the range of typical endogenous concentrations of signalling proteins (Moran et al., 2010) is indicated on the top. Since each integrin adhesome protein typically has multiple different interactions (Zaidel-Bar et al., 2007), many of them mutually exclusive, the total concentration of all endogenous proteins competing on a given measured A-B association can be approximated as the average of typical endogenous concentrations in cells multiplied by the number of the different competing proteins. This total concentration is therefore considerably larger than the concentrations of the ectopically expressed proteins, as the later ones are within the typical range of single endogenous proteins. Therefore, a given increase in the concentrations of A and B will be distributed over the multiple different competing endogenous proteins. This considerably reduces the sensitivity of the complex concentration to a given elevation of the total levels of its components. The combination of this buffering effect and the low ectopic expression levels minimizes the alteration of the levels of the measured complexes in comparison to non-transfected cells.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.02257.004 We conclude that the integrin adhesome is extensively pre-assembled in the cytosol, thereby forming multi-protein building blocks for cell-matrix adhesion sites. Our results further indicate that these building blocks are size-confined (Figure 1) and are predominantly corresponding to the functional layers across focal adhesions of anchoring and integrin regulation, force transduction, and actin regulation (Figures 2 and 4). In the cytosol, the building blocks cannot form bigger structures due to dependencies between protein interactions. We propose that at the plasma membrane the system can get locally switched on to self-assemble adhesion sites by passing through checkpoints that induce additional protein interactions in the integrin adhesome (Figure 4). These checkpoints include mechanical stabilization of the active conformation of matrix-anchored integrin by actin polymerization (Puklin-Faucher and Sheetz, 2009; Vicente-Manzanares et al., 2009; Gardel et al., 2010; Shattil et al., 2010), activation of proteins (e.g., vinculin) at the plasma membrane by phosphatidyl-inositol-4-5-bisphosphate (PIP2) (Gilmore and Burridge, 1996; Zamir and Geiger, 2001), and mechanical stretching of proteins (e.g., talin and CAS) by actomyosin contractility (Riveline et al., 2001; Sawada et al., 2006; Johnson et al., 2007; del Rio et al., 2009; Puklin-Faucher and Sheetz, 2009; Gardel et al., 2010). Since adhesion sites are self-assembled structures, a standardized pool of building blocks is essential for their correct and efficient assembly. Symmetric material exchange between adhesion sites and cytosol satisfies this requirement by ensuring that building blocks will enter and exit adhesion sites without being altered.10.7554/eLife.02257.009Figure 4.A model of switchable formation of adhesion sites via pre-assembled multi-protein building blocks.The integrin adhesome is pre-assembled in the cytosol as multi-protein building blocks for adhesion sites. These building blocks are combinatorially diversified but confined in their size. Most of the building blocks form modules that are consistent with the previously reported (Kanchanawong et al., 2010) vertical continuum of anchoring, mechanosensing, and actin regulation layers across focal adhesions. In the cytosol, the pre-assembled building blocks cannot further assemble to form bigger structures due to mutual exclusiveness between protein interactions and allosteric regulations. On the plasma membrane, the system can get locally switched on to assemble an adhesion site by passing through checkpoints that enable additional protein interactions in the integrin adhesome. These checkpoints include anchoring of integrins to the extracellular matrix, mechanical stretching of proteins like talin and CAS by actomyosin contractility, and activation of proteins like vinculin and talin by PIP2 on the plasma membrane. Symmetric material exchange between adhesion sites and cytosol retains the wiring of the building blocks and therefore retains the assembly logic and switchability of the system.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.02257.009 Rat embryonic fibroblasts, REF52 (kindly provided by Joachim Spatz and Benjamin Geiger) and NIH3T3 cells were maintained in culture in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium (DMEM; PAN-Biotech, Aidenbach, Germany, 4.5 g/l glucose) supplemented with 10% FBS (PAN-Biotech), 2 mM Gln, and 1% non-essential amino acids. 2 days prior experiments, cells were plated in MatTek dishes (MatTek Corporation, Ashland, MA), incubated for 24 hr, and then transfected with 0.4 μg of each plasmid as indicated using Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). Shortly before experiments growth medium was replaced with 2 ml HEPES buffered imaging medium (PAN-Biotech).
How can the integrin adhesome get self-assembled locally, rapidly, and correctly as diverse cell-matrix adhesion sites? Here, we investigate this question by exploring the cytosolic state of integrin-adhesome components and their dynamic exchange between adhesion sites and cytosol. Using fluorescence cross-correlation spectroscopy (FCCS) and fluorescence recovery after photobleaching (FRAP) we found that the integrin adhesome is extensively pre-assembled already in the cytosol as multi-protein building blocks for adhesion sites. Stationary focal adhesions release symmetrically the same types of protein complexes that they recruit, thereby keeping the cytosolic pool of building blocks spatiotemporally uniform. We conclude a model in which multi-protein building blocks enable rapid and modular self-assembly of adhesion sites and symmetric exchange of these building blocks preserves their specifications and thus the assembly logic of the system.
The space between the cells in a multi-cellular organism is filled with a structure called the extracellular matrix. The roles of this matrix vary from tissue to tissue, and include providing the cell with structural support and signalling cues.