 Cellular diversity in eukaryotes relies in many instances on the asymmetric partition of cell fate determinants between daughter cells at cell division. In such instances, asymmetric cell division generates daughters with different division potentials. For example, most somatic cells exhibit a limited division potential, whereas the stem cells that generate them can divide indefinitely. Understanding the basis for these differences is critical for cell biology, aging research and regenerative medicine. To determine how misfolded secretory proteins distribute between mother and bud during yeast cell division, we detected them using a recently developed live cell microscopy assay based on fluorescence recovery upon photobleaching (FRAP). Briefly, the endogenous copy of the ER Hsp70 chaperone BiP/Kar2 is expressed as a fusion protein with the super-folding green fluorescent protein (sfGFP) to form Kar2-sfGFP. The sfGFP is followed by the amino acids HDEL which are the yeast equivalent of the ER retention signal (KDEL in animal cells), such as to maintain it in the ER-lumen. This protein is fully functional as a chaperone (Lajoie et al., 2012). The diffusion of this Kar2-sfGFP, as recorded by FRAP, slows down as the levels of unfolded and aggregated proteins, with which it interacts, increase (Lajoie et al., 2012). We exploited this assay to investigate the occupancy of Kar2-sfGFP with clients in the mother and bud compartments. In homeostatic wild type cells, the initial half time (t1/2) of Kar2-sfGFP fluorescence recovery was 8.5 ± 2.3 s in the mother compartment and similarly, 7.7 ± 1.9 s in the bud (Figure 1A,C). Consistent with the previous reports (Lajoie et al., 2012), the mobility of Kar2-sfGFP dramatically decreased upon treating cells with a lethal dose of tunicamycin (Tm, 1 µg/ml), an inhibitor of N-linked glycosylation, in both mother and bud (t1/2 = 25.6 ± 9.8 s and 23.4 ± 10.1 s, respectively, after 2 hr, data not shown). However, when cells where treated with a non-lethal dose of the drug but for a longer time (0.5 µg/ml for 2 hr), to let misfolded proteins progressively accumulate, the situation was quite different (Figure 1B). Kar2-sfGFP diffusion slowed down with the incubation time in tunicamycin (t1/2 = 15.1 ± 6.8 after 1 hr and t1/2 = 20.7 ± 9.7 s after 2 hr, Figure 1C). The fraction of fast particles derived from the FRAP curves dropped from 65.7% in untreated mother cells to 19.0% in mother cells treated for 2 hr with Tm. Whereas Kar2-sfGFP diffusion was clearly slowed down in the mother cell, it remained quick in the bud (t1/2 = 11.4 ± 4.8 s after 1 hr and t1/2 = 11.1 ± 4.3 s after 2 hr, Figure 1C), indicating that misfolded proteins accumulated slowly in the mother cell and did not invade the bud.10.7554/eLife.01883.003Figure 1.Misfolded proteins are retained in the mother cell during budding yeast division.(A) FRAP analysis of Kar2-sfGFP in wild type mothers (n = 29 cells) and buds (n = 24 cells) under normal growth condition and (B) in the presence of 0.5 µg/ml of Tm. Representative cells are shown. Rectangles indicate the bleached areas. Image show cell before bleaching (pre-bleach), immediately after bleaching (0 s) and 10 s after the initial bleach (10 s). T1/2 represents the time it took to recover 50% of fluorescence of the reached plateau. Graphs of fluorescence recovery of the corresponding cells are shown. (C) Graph indicates the distribution of t1/2 for individual cells of each mutant tested in the presence (+) or absence (−) of 0.5 µg/ml Tm) n >25 cells. n.s. = not significantly different ***p<0.001 (t test). (D) Z-stack projections of CPY*-GFP and corresponding DIC images in wild type cells are shown. More images are shown in Figure 6. (E) Quantification of the FRAP of CPY*-GFP. (F) Single focal plane of Sec61-GFP and Sec61-2-GFP in wild type or ubc7Δ mutant cells. Note that the gray values have been scaled such as to be able to see both proteins. Otherwise, Sec61-2-GFP values are 5-8-fold lower than wild type Sec61-GFP. (G) Distribution of asymmetry indices of Sec61-GFP and Sec61-2-GFP in wild type or ubc7Δ mutant cells ***p<0.0001 (t test). Average ± SD are indicated (A, B, C, E, G). Scale bars = 2 µm.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.01883.003 Although recent studies have underlined their broad distribution and roles, we still know little, if anything, about how lateral diffusion barriers form in eukaryotes, what they are composed of and how they function. To start addressing these questions, we investigated the organization and function of ER barriers in budding yeast. This study establishes several points. Firstly, they reveal the importance of sphingolipids in the organization and compartmentalization of the ER. Together with the observation that most membrane proteins are partially excluded from the barrier area, our data suggest a mechanism for how barriers form and function, (Figure 13 and ’Diffusion barriers as specialized lipid domains of the ER membrane’). Secondly, our study indicates that different barriers are probably based on similar principles, yet their formation is dictated by different signaling mechanisms. We have identified some of the signaling processes involved in the assembly of the diffusion barrier in the cortical ER, namely the Bud1 and the Cdc24 module. However, the nuclear envelope diffusion barrier is not affected in the bud1Δ mutant cells, indicating that assembly of the nuclear barrier is controlled differently. Thirdly, this difference in regulation allows the barriers to be studied individually to assess their specific functions. In general, these studies underline the importance of lateral diffusion barriers in the confinement of cellular stress to the mother cell. They also allow distinguishing the relative impact of different types of stresses on cellular aging under different growth conditions. We discuss below each of these three aspects of our findings in more detail.10.7554/eLife.01883.015Figure 13.Model for the cortical ER diffusion barrier.Septins (red ovals) assemble at the plasma membrane and organize the Bud1-Cdc42 module (brown, blue, yellow and violet ovals), which targets Bud6 (green). Bud6 might help organizing sphingolipids (red) at the bud neck in a liquid-ordered domain, thereby forming a lateral diffusion barrier. Note that trans-membrane proteins (dark blue) are excluded from this region but not from the rest or the ER (green lipids), due to their short transmembrane domain. ER luminal proteins (light blue) are found in the whole ER lumen. Misfolded proteins are retained in the mother part of the ER because they are themselves trans-membrane proteins or because they are attached to an unknown anchor (X, blue).DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.01883.015 All yeast strains were constructed according to standard genetic techniques and are isogenic to S288C, unless stated otherwise. The different deletions were obtained from the EUROSCARF deletion collection (Frankfurt, Germany) and provided to us by M Peter (ETH, Zurich, Switzerland). All experiments were performed with three independent clones. All cultures or plates were grown at 30°C.
In many cell types, lateral diffusion barriers compartmentalize the plasma membrane and, at least in budding yeast, the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). However, the molecular nature of these barriers, their mode of action and their cellular functions are unclear. Here, we show that misfolded proteins of the ER remain confined into the mother compartment of budding yeast cells. Confinement required the formation of a lateral diffusion barrier in the form of a distinct domain of the ER-membrane at the bud neck, in a septin-, Bud1 GTPase- and sphingolipid-dependent manner. The sphingolipids, but not Bud1, also contributed to barrier formation in the outer membrane of the dividing nucleus. Barrier-dependent confinement of ER stress into the mother cell promoted aging. Together, our data clarify the physical nature of lateral diffusion barriers in the ER and establish the role of such barriers in the asymmetric segregation of proteotoxic misfolded proteins during cell division and aging.
Cell division isn't always about splitting a cell into two identical parts. The diversity of many of our own cells relies on asymmetric cell divisions. The yeast used to make bread rely on a process called ‘budding’ that involves a small daughter cell emerging from the surface of the mother cell. Mother cells can only produce around 20-50 daughter cells before dying from old age. However, their daughters are always born rejuvenated, and not aged like their mothers.