 Clathrin-mediated endocytosis is a conserved and ubiquitous process for internalizing material from the cell surface. The Adaptor Protein-2 (AP2) complex serves as a bridge between cargo at the plasma membrane and clathrin. The AP2 core complex contains binding sites for membrane phospholipids and endocytic cargo while the appendages bind clathrin and accessory proteins that coordinate endocytosis (Traub and Bonifacino, 2013). AP2 thereby binds target proteins on the surface of the cell and assembles the machinery necessary for internalization of cargo. Mutations in the AP2 complex alpha and mu subunits in C. elegans (encoded by the apa-2 and apm-2 genes) result in animals with pleiotropic phenotypes including reduced body length (Dpy), egg-laying defects (Egl) and uncoordinated locomotion (Unc). In addition, they exhibit a unique ‘jowls’ phenotype, in which the mutants exhibit bulges in the cuticle on either side of the head (Gu et al., 2013). Deletion of the sigma subunit (aps-2) produces a similar ‘jowls’ phenotype (Figure 1A and Figure 1—figure supplement 1B), while the beta subunit is shared by both AP1 and AP2 in C. elegans and mutations in apb-1 are lethal. We screened for mutants with the jowls phenotype and identified multiple mutations in three genes coding for alpha adaptin, mu2 adaptin and the nematode homolog of FCHo (Figure 1—figure supplement 2). We generated a deletion allele fcho-1(ox477) by transposon excision (Figure 1—figure supplement 1A); all six mutant alleles of fcho-1 produced defects strikingly similar to mutants lacking AP2 subunits, including the ‘jowls’ phenotype (Figure 1A and Figure 1—figure supplement 1B), suggesting that AP2 function is compromised in the absence of FCHo.10.7554/eLife.03648.003Figure 1.Loss of FCHo compromises AP2 activity.(A) Animals cropped to highlight jowls (red arrrowheads, anterior up) shared by fcho-1 and AP2 subunit mutants (apa-2, apm-2, aps-2). (B) Left, representative confocal micrographs of coelomocytes in worms expressing GFP-tagged alpha subunit. Images represent maximum projections of Z-slices through ∼1/2 of a coelomocyte. Numbers indicate the coefficient of variance of pixel intensities across coelomocytes (excluding the cell periphery). *p < 0.01 unpaired, two-tailed t-test. Right, normalized histograms of pixel intensities (logarithmic scale). Arrow indicates higher intensity pixels that are missing in fcho-1 mutants. (C) Time-lapse montages of FRAP experiments on coelomocytes expressing alpha:GFP in adult hermaphrodites. The outlined membrane region was photobleached at time = 0. (D) FRAP assay. Average recovery curves and time constants of fluorescence after photobleaching. *p < 0.01 unpaired, two-tailed t-test on data from 12 fcho(+) coelomocytes and 14 fcho(−) coelomocytes. (E) Cargo assay. Micrographs of intestinal cells (anterior left) expressing a GFP-tagged transmembrane cargo internalized by AP2. The cargo is a truncated CD4 transmembrane construct with a YxxΦ cargo recognition motif (Figure 1—figure supplement 1C). The average pixel intensity along an intestinal basal-lateral membrane in fcho(+) animals (n = 11) is 972 plus-minus 85 arbitrary units (au) and 5610 plus-minus 416 au in fcho(−) mutants (n = 12). p < 0.01 unpaired, two-tailed t-test. Data in (B), (D) and (E) represent the mean plus-minus SEM.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.03648.00310.7554/eLife.03648.004Figure 1—figure supplement 1.FCHO-1 and AP2 regulate the same pathways.(A) Diagram of the fcho-1 locus in C. elegans indicating four point mutations and two deletions associated with a loss-of-function phenotype. The targeted deletion (ox477) was generated by mobilizing the Mos1 transposon and repairing the broken chromosome with a recombinant template that replaces the first eight exons with a positive selection (unc-119 rescue). ox477 was used exclusively throughout this study as fcho(−). (B) Images of animals cropped in Figure 1A. fcho(−) and AP2 subunit(−) animals are dumpy and egg-laying defective. Red arrowheads point to jowls. (C) Diagram of artificial GFP-CD4 AP2 cargo. GFP was flanked by two 12 amino acid flexible linkers and inserted between a secretion signal peptide from C. elegans PAT-3 and a modified human CD4 truncated to include two immunoglobulin domains, the transmembrane domain, and eight amino acids from the cytoplasmic domain (Feinberg et al., 2008). The four amino acid YxxΦ motif from the C-terminus of the C. elegans lysosome-associated membrane glycoprotein, LMP-1, was appended. (D) Cargo assay (amount of GFP-tagged cargo on intestinal cell membrane). **p < 0.01, unpaired, two-tailed t-test compared to WT, n ≥ 9. (E) Brood size assay. Number of fertilized embryos produced by individual hermaphrodites of the indicated genotype. *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, unpaired, two-tailed t-test compared to WT, n ≥ 8. Values for WT and apa-2 samples were previously published (Gu et al., 2013). (F) Starvation assay. Days required for a worm population to expand and consume the bacterial food. **p < 0.01, unpaired, two-tailed t-test compared to WT, n = 12. Data in (D), (E) and (F) represent the mean plus-minus SEM.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.03648.00410.7554/eLife.03648.005Figure 1—figure supplement 2.Recessive alleles isolated from genetic screen for ‘jowls’ phenotype * independently identified ‘jowls’ mutant.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.03648.005 Mutations in the FCHo gene were found to phenocopy loss of AP2 subunits in the nematode C. elegans, suggesting these proteins act in a single pathway. We found that FCHo acts upstream of AP2: the function of FCHo can be bypassed by constitutively open mutations in the AP2 complex. Moreover the effect of FCHo on AP2 is direct: a 90 amino acid fragment of the linker domain in the FCHo family proteins binds AP2. This activator fragment is necessary and sufficient for rescue when overexpressed in fcho-1 mutants. Worm strains were cultured and maintained using standard methods (Brenner, 1974). A complete list of strains and mutations used is in the Extended Strains List (Supplementary file 1A).
The AP2 clathrin adaptor complex links protein cargo to the endocytic machinery but it is unclear how AP2 is activated on the plasma membrane. Here we demonstrate that the membrane-associated proteins FCHo and SGIP1 convert AP2 into an open, active conformation. We screened for Caenorhabditis elegans mutants that phenocopy the loss of AP2 subunits and found that AP2 remains inactive in fcho-1 mutants. A subsequent screen for bypass suppressors of fcho-1 nulls identified 71 compensatory mutations in all four AP2 subunits. Using a protease-sensitivity assay we show that these mutations restore the open conformation in vivo. The domain of FCHo that induces this rearrangement is not the F-BAR domain or the µ-homology domain, but rather is an uncharacterized 90 amino acid motif, found in both FCHo and SGIP proteins, that directly binds AP2. Thus, these proteins stabilize nascent endocytic pits by exposing membrane and cargo binding sites on AP2.
All cells are enveloped by a plasma membrane. To interact with the outside world, cells constantly recycle the molecules found in, or on, this barrier. This is accomplished by drawing in small patches of the membrane containing these ‘cargo’ molecules via a process called endocytosis. The predominant method of endocytosis involves coating the tiny membrane pouches with a scaffold-like structure made of clathrin molecules. However, clathrin requires a set of four proteins (known as the adaptor protein-2 complex) to connect the membrane and cargo to the clathrin cage.