 The primary cilium is a non-motile microtubule-based organelle, organized by the mother centriole (basal body). Though known for over a century, it received little interest until it was appreciated that it is highly enriched in receptors for various signaling pathways, including PDGF, calcium, receptor tyrosine kinases, Wnt, and Hh (Satir et al., 2010). The assembly of primary cilium is coupled to cell cycle exit and entry into quiescence. The primary cilium functions as a tumor suppressor organelle that regulates cell proliferation and differentiation (Pan et al., 2012). Dysfunctions of the primary cilium cause a set of human diseases, classified as ciliopathies, such as polycystic kidney diseases (Hildebrandt et al., 2011). Cancers are also associated with the loss of cilia, due to misregulated cell proliferation through ciliary signaling (Plotnikova et al., 2008). Given the well-established role for APC in dividing cells, we are interested in whether APC is still active and what role it might have in quiescent ciliated cells. Human hTERT-RPE1 cell line is an established model to study the assembly/disassembly of primary cilia (Pugacheva et al., 2007). Greater than 80% of RPE1 cells are ciliated after serum-starvation for 48 hr, and disassembly of primary cilia occurs 1-2 hr after re-adding serum. We found that APC is still active in cytoplasmic extracts of quiescent ciliated RPE1, using the canonical APC substrate Securin (Figure 1—figure supplement 1). Immunostaining showed that APC subunit 2 (APC2) is localized to the basal body of the ciliated cells (Figure 1A and Figure 1—figure supplement 2A), consistent with the previous report that APC is localized to the basal body of motile cilia in the Xenopus epidermis (Ganner et al., 2009). Co-localization of APC2 with dynactin subunit P150 (Guo et al., 2006) further confirmed its localization to the mother centriole (Figure 1—figure supplement 2B and 2C). Furthermore, we found that the APC co-activator Cdc20 is also localized to basal body of the primary cilium (Figure 1B), whereas Cdh1 did not show such localization (Figure1—figure supplement 3). Interestingly, Cdc20 was not observed at the centrosome of cycling interphase non-ciliated cells (Figure 1B and Figure1—figure supplement 2D), indicating that Cdc20 is specifically recruited to the basal body during ciliogenesis, rather than generally binding to the interphase centrosome. Western blotting showed that Cdc20 protein levels are dramatically reduced after serum starvation for 24 hr, due to the exit of cells from proliferation (Figure 1—figure supplement 2E). Importantly, Cdc20 protein levels were significantly elevated at 48 hr after serum starvation, when >80% of the cells are ciliated, consistent with the appearance of this protein at the basal body. Thus, our data suggest that APC-Cdc20 may have a special role at the basal body after initiation of ciliogenesis.10.7554/eLife.03083.003Figure 1.APC-Cdc20 is localized to the basal body of the primary cilium.(A) Subconfluent hTERT-RPE1 cells were serum starved for 48 hr, fixed, and stained for APC subunit 2 (APC2, red), acetylated tubulin (green) and DNA (blue). (B) Proliferating interphase RPE1 cells, serum starved cells, and quiescent cells after serum stimulation were fixed and stained for Cdc20 (red), acetylated tubulin (green), and DNA (blue). Boxes in main images indicate structures shown at higher magnification to right. The scale bars in this figure represent 10 μm.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.03083.00310.7554/eLife.03083.004Figure 1—figure supplement 1.Degradation of securin in RPE1 cell extracts.Cytosolic cell extracts were made from unsynchronized proliferating, serum-starved RPE1 cells respectively. Degradation of securin in these cell extracts at indicated time points was analyzed by western blot. TAME was added to test the dependence of the degradation on APC activity. Cell extract immunodepleted of Cdc20 was used for degradation assay as comparison.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.03083.00410.7554/eLife.03083.005Figure 1—figure supplement 2.Localization of APC-Cdc20 to the basal body of primary cilia.(A) Non-ciliated RPE1 cells (left) and ciliated cells (right) after serum starvation were stained for APC2 (red), acetylated tubulin (green), and DNA (blue). (B)Subconfluent hTERT-RPE1 cells were serum starved for 48 hr, fixed, and stained for APC subunit2 (APC2, red) and dynactin subunit P150 (green), and DNA (blue). (C) Starved RPE1 cells were fixed and stained for centrin 1 (red), dynactin subunit P150 (green), and DNA (blue). (D) Proliferating interphase cells and serum-starved cells were stained for Cdc20 (red) and γ-tubulin (green). The scale bars in this figure represent 10 μm. (E) RPE1 cells were collected at indicated time points during starvation and post serum stimulation and subjected to western blot for Cdc20 and GAPDH respectively.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.03083.00510.7554/eLife.03083.006Figure 1—figure supplement 3.Cdh1 is not localized to the basal body of primary cilia.Starved RPE1 cells were fixed and stained for acetylated tubulin (green), DNA (blue), and Cdh1 (red). For Immunostaining of endogenous Cdh1, three different antibodies against Cdh1 were used as depicted.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.03083.006 The assembly, maintenance, and disassembly of the primary cilium are regulated by the control of intraflagellar transport and protein posttranslational modifications (Besschetnova et al., 2010). Impairment of ciliary length control and ciliary assembly can lead to inappropriate cell proliferation and defects in signal transduction, causing ciliopathies and perhaps tumorigenesis. Though more and more is understood about which proteins control ciliary function, much of it through human genetics, much less is known about regulatory features that control the timing of ciliogenesis, and with respect to our work here, ciliary resorption. Surprisingly, some of the machinery for regulation is very similar to that used in regulation of the mitotic cycle, which depends significantly on posttranslational modifications. In particular the mitotic process in cells is controlled from the top by the activation of a kinase, Cdk1-cyclin B and an E3 component of the ubiquitin pathway, APC-Cdc20 and APC-Cdh1. We have found that the same Cdc20 is recruited to the basal body of the primary cilium, where in complex with APC it negatively regulates ciliary length, by destabilizing axonemal microtubules. Following serum stimulation of quiescent cells, APC-Cdc20 is fully activated leading to ciliary shortening and resorption. hTERT-RPE1 cells were grown in Dulbecco's Modified Eagle Medium (DMEM) with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS). For analysis of ciliary assembly, cells were plated at subconfluence on glass coverslips and starved for 48 hr in DMEM without serum to induce cilia formation. To induce ciliary resorption, starved ciliated cells at subconfluence were treated with DMEM medium with 10% serum for 1-4 hr. Plasmids were transiently transfected into cells with FuGENE 6 Transfection Reagent (Promega, Madison, WI). For siRNA treatment, cells were transfected with indicated siRNA by Lipofectamine RNAiMAX Transfection Reagent (Life Technologies, Beverly, MA).
The primary cilium has an important role in signaling; defects in structure are associated with a variety of human diseases. Much of the most basic biology of this organelle is poorly understood, even basic mechanisms, such as control of growth and resorption. We show that the activity of the anaphase-promoting complex (APC), an E3 that regulates the onset of anaphase, destabilizes axonemal microtubules in the primary cilium. Furthermore, the metaphase APC co-activator, Cdc20, is specifically recruited to the basal body of primary cilia. Inhibition of APC-Cdc20 activity increases the ciliary length, while overexpression of Cdc20 suppresses cilium formation. APC-Cdc20 activity is required for the timely resorption of the cilium after serum stimulation. In addition, APC regulates the stability of axonemal microtubules through targeting Nek1, the ciliary kinase, for proteolysis. These data demonstrate a novel function of APC beyond cell cycle control and implicate critical role of ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis in ciliary disassembly.
The majority of cells in the human body have small hair-like structures that project from the cell surface. These structures, known as primary cilia, are involved in sensing light and touch, and they are also required for an organism to develop normally. Defects in cilia result in a wide range of human diseases that are collectively known as ciliopathies. These include polycystic kidney disease and Bardet-Biedl syndrome. Ciliary disorders can also affect almost every organ in the body leading to blindness, obesity, diabetes, and cancer.