 GalNAc-type O-linked glycans are polysaccharides present on secreted and membrane-inserted proteins (Tran and Ten Hagen, 2013). Traditionally associated with mucin-like proteins, recent advances in mass spectrometric analysis have revealed O-glycosylation on hundreds of different proteins (Steentoft et al., 2013). Recent results have also highlighted specific functional roles for O-glycans; for instance, in regulating the secretion of the phosphatemia regulator FGF23 (Kato et al., 2006) and in processing of the angiopoietin-like factor ANGPTL2 (Schjoldager et al., 2010). We recently reported the results from a screen for regulators of Golgi morphology and organisation using various markers including fluorescently labelled HPL (Chia et al., 2012). In the analysis presented in this study, we quantified Tn levels using HPL fluorescence intensity per cell (Figure 1A). In a pilot screen using HeLa cells, which targeted 63 known players of membrane traffic (Chia et al., 2012), we identified that knockdown of the SNARE gene Syntaxin 5 (STX5) reproducibly induced a 6–7-fold increase in Tn levels relative to a non-targeting (NT) control (GFP siRNA) (Figure 1A). This effect was presumably due to a defect in the balance in anterograde vs retrograde ER-to-Golgi traffic of GalNAc-Ts. Using STX5 and GFP siRNA as positive and negative controls, we then screened 948 signalling genes in search for regulators of O-glycosylation. We discarded the results for 134 siRNA pools that reduced the cell number to less than 20% of the control (Figure 1B). Of the remaining siRNA pools, we identified numerous gene knockdowns that increased HPL levels significantly more than STX5 depletion. None of the gene depletions seemed to significantly reduce the basal levels of Tn in HeLa cells (Figure 1C). The knockdown effects were reproduced in independent replicates (Figure 1–figure supplement 1A), and the trend was mostly independent of the analysis algorithm used, although the fold increase was higher with one method than with the other (Figure 1—figure supplement 1B).10.7554/eLife.01828.003Figure 1.RNAi screening reveals 12 negative regulators of Tn expression.(A) Helix pomatia lectin (HPL) staining was analysed using the ‘Transfluor HT’ module of MetaXpress software (Molecular Devices). A mask was generated for both HPL and nuclei (Hoechst) staining to classify the region of measurement (lower panels). Scale bar: 30 µm. (B) Schematic overview of the screening process. Images from the RNAi screen in Chia et al. (2012) were quantified for HPL intensities. Non-targeting (NT) siRNA and Syntaxin 5 (STX5) siRNA were used as negative and positive controls, resepectively. (C) Fold-change of HPL intensities normalised to NT siRNA treatment (green dots) and STX5 (orange dots). Primary hits were selected based on a threshold of a nine-fold increase (red dashed line) and the final validated genes are labelled in red (Hit genes). (D) Images from the screen of HPL staining in HeLa cells depleted of ERK8. MannII-GFP labels the Golgi apparatus. Scale bar: 30 μm. (E) HPL staining in cells knockdown of ERK8 with a control siRNA or GalNAc-T1 and -T2 siRNA. Scale bar: 30 μm.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.01828.00310.7554/eLife.01828.004Figure 1—figure supplement 1.Helix Pomatia Lectin (HPL) stains reliably and specifically for Tn antigen.(A) Comparison of the HPL intensities between the two screen replicates. (B) Comparison of HPL intensities generated from different analysis algorithms from the HCSU (high content screening unit) application (Chia et al., 2012) and MetaXpress transfluor HT (Molecular Devices). (C) Quantification of the Tn levels of ERK8 depletion with pooled and deconvoluted siRNAs (dERK8-1 to 4). (D) Hit validation using deconvoluted siRNA pools. HPL intensities were quantified in HeLa cells treated with each of the four individual duplex siRNAs from the pool for the 19 primary hits. A gene was validated if at least two unique siRNAs reproduced at least a 4.5-fold increase in HPL intensities. (E) Comparison of HPL and Vicia Villosa Lectin (VVL) staining intensities in ERK8 and MAP4K2 depletion. (F) Quantification of Tn levels upon co-knockdown (coKD) of each of the 12 validated Tn regulators with GalNAc-T1 and -T2. (G) SDS-PAGE analysis of ERK8 expression levels in single and co-knockdown with GalNAc-T1 and -T2. Values on graphs indicate mean plus-minus SEM. **p<0.0001, *p<0.05 by two-tailed unpaired t test, relative to the non-targeting (NT) siRNA-treated cells. NS, not significant.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.01828.004 Cellular levels of the Tn antigen vary dramatically in cancer cells, suggesting that O-glycosylation initiation and/or elongation is highly regulated. Indeed, our screen results reveal that several signalling molecules exert significant control over O-glycosylation initiation. In recent years, we have reported that this initiation step can be regulated through trafficking of the GalNAc-Ts between the ER and the Golgi (Gill et al., 2010) and that marked ER localisation explains the high Tn phenotype in at least 60% of human breast tumours (Gill et al., 2013). High Tn levels can also arise from a loss or inhibition of the elongation of the O-GalNAc, a mechanism that has also been proposed to underlie the cancer phenotype (Ju et al., 2011). HeLa MannII-GFP was from Vivek Malhotra’s laboratory (CRG, Barcelona) and maintained in DMEM with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS). HeLa cells that were knockout of COSMC was obtained from U Mendel and H Clausen (University of Copenhagen, Denmark). HeLa ER-Lec2-GFP and KDEL-R-GFP cell lines were generated by lentiviral infection of HeLa wild-type cells with ER-2Lec-GFP (Gill et al., 2013) and KDEL-R-GFP lentivirus and subsequently, FACS sorted to enrich for GFP-expressing cells. HEK293T cells were grown in DMEM supplemented with 15% FBS. All cells were grown at 37°C in a 10% CO2 incubator. Human MAPK15/ ERK8 (NM_139021) was amplified from cDNA purchased from Origene (#RG216589; Rockville, MD) by PCR and cloned into entry vector pDONR221 (Invitrogen, Life Technologies Corporation, Carlsbad, CA). The catalytically inactive ERK8 mutant construct was generated by introducing T175A and Y177F mutations using the QuikChange Site-Directed Mutagenesis Kit (Stratagene, Amsterdam, The Netherlands). The entry vectors were subsequently cloned into pcDNA6.2-Nmcherry-DEST, a gateway compatible destination vector constructed by the replacement of the GFP tag with mCherry on pcDNA6.2-NGFP-DEST (Invitrogen). Human ARF1 (NM-001024228)-GFP expression clones were described previously (Gill et al., 2010). miR-ERK8 and miR-GFP vector were generated from BLOCK- iT Pol II miR RNAi expression vector kits from Invitrogen. All constructs were verified by sequencing and restriction enzyme digests before use.
ER O-glycosylation can be induced through relocalisation GalNAc-Transferases from the Golgi. This process markedly stimulates cell migration and is constitutively activated in more than 60% of breast carcinomas. How this activation is achieved remains unclear. Here, we screened 948 signalling genes using RNAi and imaging. We identified 12 negative regulators of O-glycosylation that all control GalNAc-T sub-cellular localisation. ERK8, an atypical MAPK with high basal kinase activity, is a strong hit and is partially localised at the Golgi. Its inhibition induces the relocation of GalNAc-Ts, but not of KDEL receptors, revealing the existence of two separate COPI-dependent pathways. ERK8 down-regulation, in turn, activates cell motility. In human breast and lung carcinomas, ERK8 expression is reduced while ER O-glycosylation initiation is hyperactivated. In sum, ERK8 appears as a constitutive brake on GalNAc-T relocalisation, and the loss of its expression could drive cancer aggressivity through increased cell motility.
The likelihood of an individual being able to recover from cancer depends on: where the cancer is within the body, how quickly the disease is detected and how quickly treatment is started. Cancers that have spread from their original location to another part of the body are particular challenging to treat, and cause the vast majority of cancer deaths every year.