 Most living animals undergo a physiological decline with age. Yet, despite decades of intense study, no consensus has emerged regarding the primary cause of this decline. One leading hypothesis is the free radical theory of aging, which postulates that aging is caused by an accumulation of oxidative damage to cellular macromolecules (Harman, 1956). Many lines of correlative evidence support this theory (Muller et al., 2007). However, while these studies confirm the general notion that oxidative damage is associated with aging, recent studies in mice have generated conflicting results as few of the genetic manipulations targeting conserved antioxidant genes showed the predicted effects on lifespan (Perez et al., 2009). Hence, the jury is still out on the question of whether oxidative damage is a cause of aging or simply a consequence (Salmon et al., 2010). Chronological lifespan measurements of S. cerevisiae wild-type and mutant strains suggested that ROS might affect and potentially even determine the postmitotic lifespan of yeast (Longo et al., 1997; Fabrizio and Longo, 2007). We therefore decided to apply the quantitative redox proteomic technique OxICAT to monitor the redox status of our previously identified yeast protein thiols during the chronological lifespan of this organism. OxICAT is based on the differential modification of in vivo reduced and in vivo oxidized cysteine thiols, respectively with isotopically light 12C and isotopically heavy 13C versions of the isotope-coded affinity tag (ICAT) thiol alkylating reagent (for scheme see Figure 1—figure supplement 1A). This differential thiol trapping with ICAT is followed by a tryptic digest of the proteins contained in the cell lysate and the purification of all ICAT-labeled peptides using an affinity tag. Liquid chromatography combined with mass spectrometry (MS) and MS/MS analysis is used to separate and identify the ICAT-labeled peptides, and to quantify the ratio of in vivo reduced to oxidized protein thiols in individual peptides. Because this ratio is unaffected by changes in relative protein amounts, OxICAT is uniquely suited to simultaneously monitor changes in the thiol oxidation status of hundreds of proteins over time. In this study, we used a quantitative redox proteomic approach combined with metabolic measurements to assess a time line of physiological redox events that occur in aging non-dividing cells, using chronologically aging S. cerevisiae as a model system. We made the very surprising observation that early during the chronological aging process and significantly before cell death sets in, yeast cells undergo an abrupt loss in redox homeostasis as indicated by the massive oxidation of the large majority of thiol-containing cytosolic, nuclear, and mitochondrial proteins. Importantly, this oxidation event is significantly delayed by caloric restriction and even more so by a shift to hypometabolic cultivation conditions, suggesting that maintenance of redox homeostasis might contribute to the lifespan extending effects of these regimens. To begin to understand what physiological event(s) trigger the observed redox collapse, we compared the kinetics of oxidation in almost 300 different protein thiols. We noted that thiol oxidation occurs in at least two waves. The first wave, which affects only a very small subset of identified thiol-containing proteins (<10%), hit cells cultivated in standard media within 24-48 hr after reaching exponential growth. At this point, cells had stopped dividing (Figure 1—figure supplement 1B), transitioned to respiratory growth, and NADPH levels, which transiently increased during the diauxic shift, had started to decrease significantly (Figure 6B). The second wave of oxidation, which occurred about 24 hr later, affected nearly 70% of the remaining identified yeast protein thiols (Figure 2). Yet as observed before, yeast cells were able to maintain their energy resources (i.e., ATP levels) and to survive for several more days after the collapse. Bioinformatic analysis revealed that many of the very early oxidation targets are cysteines that form part of a C-X2/3-C motif (e.g., thioredoxin reductase, CCT4, CCT8, YdJ1, RPL42, PAA1, MES1). This cysteine motif is often found in disulfide oxidoreductases, redox-sensitive transcription factors, and many metal binding proteins, and confers considerable redox sensitivity to proteins (Sanchez et al., 2008). Hence, this cysteine motif allows many of these proteins to form transient disulfide bonds within the otherwise reducing environment of the cytosol. Based on the popular free radical theory of aging, we first suspected that a sudden surge in or accumulation of peroxide might be the cause of the early oxidation of these proteins. However, we found that only 5 of the 28 early oxidation targets were previously identified to contain peroxide-sensitive thiols (Table 1, indicated with asterisk). Moreover, protein thiols that we had previously identified to be highly peroxide-sensitive, such as the active site cysteines of GapDH or AHP1 (a thiol-peroxidase that undergoes reversible disulfide bond formation upon peroxide detoxification) were not among the early oxidation targets in yeast (Figure 1—Source data 1). These results suggested that elevated peroxide production is unlikely the cause of the early oxidation event. Instead, we noted that the early oxidation event is significantly preceded by a loss in cellular NADPH, the electron donor of the NADPH-dependent thioredoxin system. Moreover, we found that under conditions of caloric restriction, each of the individual processes was time-delayed by about 48 hr: NADPH decrease, early protein (i.e., thioredoxin reductase) oxidation, and the collapse of the thiol redox proteome. These findings raised the intriguing possibility that these processes are directly connected (Figure 7) and that loss of NADPH might be the trigger for the observed redox collapse. Consistent with this idea, analysis of the cellular GSH/GSSG ratio in chronologically aging yeast cells, which is dependent on the NADPH-dependent glutathione reductase, revealed a pro-oxidizing shift in the GSH redox potential that coincided with the decrease in cellular NADPH levels. As before, this pro-oxidizing shift was significantly delayed in calorically restricted growth conditions (Figure 7). These findings would explain how a reduction in caloric intake, which transiently increases cellular NADPH levels (Figure 6B), is able to extend maintenance of the cellular redox balance and might contribute to lifespan extension. It is noteworthy that similar pro-oxidizing shifts in thioredoxin and glutathione systems have also been observed in aging rodents (Cho et al., 2003; Rohrbach et al., 2006; Rebrin and Sohal, 2008), and might, at least in part, be explained by the observed decrease in cellular NADPH levels in aging rats (Parihar et al., 2008). Consistent with our studies, caloric restriction at least partially reversed the detected changes in redox status, shifted the glutathione pool to a more reducing redox potential relative to cultures grown in 2% glucose, and increased cellular NADPH levels (Someya et al., 2010). These results suggest that the observed decrease in cellular NADPH levels and the concomitant increase in cellular redox potential is not just a yeast-specific event but might be shared with other aging organisms as their metabolism changes. The fact that yeast cells undergo the very same pattern of NADPH decrease, Trr1 oxidation and redox collapse (albeit time-delayed) when cultivated in 2% glucose or in 0.5% glucose medium also argues against the possibility that medium acidification, which has been discussed to accelerate chronological aging in yeast, is a contributing factor to the observed effects, as medium acidification is severe in 2% glucose yet insignificant in 0.5% glucose (Burtner et al., 2009).10.7554/eLife.00306.014Figure 7.Timeline of redox events in chronologically aging yeast cells.The graphs shown provide a comparative assessment of cell viability (based on data shown in Figure 1A), ATP levels (Figure 2B), NADPH levels (Figure 6B), EGSH measurements (Figure 6A), and thiol oxidation states of representative early (i.e., PYC2) and general targets (e.g., GapDH/TDH) (Table 1) during the chronological lifespan of yeast strain DBY746 under standard and caloric restriction conditions. A colored scale for each assessed parameter is provided.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.00306.014 S. cerevisiae strain EG103 (DBY746; MATα, leu2-3 112 his3Δ1 trp1-289a ura3-52) was cultivated in synthetic complete dextrose (standard SCD) medium, which consists of 0.67% yeast nitrogen base supplemented with complete amino acid mix (Guthrie, 2002) and 2% wt/vol glucose at 30°C. To cultivate yeast under caloric restriction conditions, glucose concentration was decreased to 0.5% wt/vol. Chronological lifespan was monitored as previously described (Fabrizio and Longo, 2007). Cell aliquots were taken each day and viability was assessed using propidium iodide (PI) staining (Deere et al., 1998). Viability is given as the percent of cells that are unstained by PI over the total number of cells in the optic field. Deletion mutants of thioredoxin reductase 1 and 2 (TRR1 and TRR2) were constructed in EG103 by using homologous recombination of a PCR product containing the ClonNAt resistance marker (Goldstein and McCusker, 1999).
The precise roles that oxidants play in lifespan and aging are still unknown. Here, we report the discovery that chronologically aging yeast cells undergo a sudden redox collapse, which affects over 80% of identified thiol-containing proteins. We present evidence that this redox collapse is not triggered by an increase in endogenous oxidants as would have been postulated by the free radical theory of aging. Instead it appears to be instigated by a substantial drop in cellular NADPH, which normally provides the electron source for maintaining cellular redox homeostasis. This decrease in NADPH levels occurs very early during lifespan and sets into motion a cascade that is predicted to down-regulate most cellular processes. Caloric restriction, a near-universal lifespan extending measure, increases NADPH levels and delays each facet of the cascade. Our studies reveal a time line of events leading up to the system-wide oxidation of the proteome days before cell death.
While most animals experience a physiological decline as they age, the underlying cause of this decline is not fully understood. According to the free radical theory of aging, chemicals known as reactive oxygen species build up in the body and then cause damage to various components within cells, including DNA and proteins. These species, which include hydrogen peroxide and peroxynitrite, can cause substantial oxidative damage. However, while there is definitely a relationship between aging and reactive oxygen species, it remains possible that oxidative damage is a byproduct of aging rather than the cause of it.