 The distribution of mitochondria and mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) is accomplished through the engagement of multiple pathways, including mitochondrial division, fusion, motility, and tethering. Mitochondrial division is mediated by a dynamin-related protein, Dnm1 (in yeast)/Drp1 (in mammals) (Lackner and Nunnari, 2009), which self-assembles in a regulated manner on the surface of the mitochondrial outer membrane into helices that mediate mitochondrial scission (Ingerman et al., 2005; Mears et al., 2011). Dnm1 and Drp1 form helices in vitro, whose diameters are significantly smaller than the diameter of unconstricted mitochondria (Ingerman et al., 2005; Bossy et al., 2010). This observation suggests that a mechanism for Dnm1/Drp1-independent constriction may exist to facilitate helix assembly as a first step toward mitochondrial division. To assess whether ERMES foci are spatially linked to mitochondrial division, we simultaneously imaged fluorescent protein (FP)-tagged ERMES components and mitochondria over time in living yeast cells. To this end, we expressed functional C-terminal GFP fusions of Mdm12, Mdm34, or Mmm1 from their respective endogenous loci and labeled mitochondria using mitochondrial matrix-targeted DsRed (mito-DsRed). We observed a majority of mitochondrial division events associated with Mdm12, Mdm34, or Mmm1-labeled ERMES foci, which subsequent to the division segregate to only one of the two newly generated tips in the mitochondrial network (Figure 1A,B). The fraction of division events associated with ERMES foci (54-60%) is significantly higher than that predicted for a random association (approximately 10%), based on the surface area of mitochondria associated with ERMES (Figure 1B and ‘Materials and methods’). The detection of ERMES foci by fluorescence imaging may underestimate ERMES foci associated with mitochondrial division as we observed a positive correlation between the percentage of mitochondrial divisions associated with a given ERMES subunit and its estimated whole-cell abundance (Huh et al., 2003). However, we cannot rule out the possibility that non-ERMES-associated mitochondrial division sites exist in cells.10.7554/eLife.00422.003Figure 1.ERMES marks sites of ER-associated mitochondrial division.(A) A timelapse series of Mdm34-yEGFP and mito-DsRed. For clarity, the images represent a maximum projection of a 2-μm section of a cell that accurately represents a mitochondrial division observed in a single plane. The first frame represents a whole-cell projection containing an inset that is shown in the remaining frames. Below each frame of the timelapse series is a plot of pixel intensity vs distance (line-scan) of mito-DsRed fluorescence signal as indicated by the dashed line at 0 s. The range of the y-axis is 260 arbitratry units and the range of the x-axis is 151 pixels. (B) Quantification of ERMES-associated mitochondrial divisions in wild-type cells using data collected as described above. (C) ERMES foci are associated with ER tubules at mitochondrial division sites. Cells expressing Mdm34-yEGFP, DsRed-HDEL, and mito-TagBFP were imaged in a single plane every 10 s. The first frame represents a whole-cell projection containing an inset that is shown in the remaining frames. (D) ERMES foci are adjacent to Dnm1 at the mitochondrial division sites. Cells expressing Mdm34-yEGFP, Dnm1-mCherry, and mito-TagBFP were imaged in a single focal plane every 10 s (E) gem1Δ cells expressing GFP-2xFLAG-Gem1, Mdm34-mCherry, and mito-TagBFP were imaged in a single focal plane every 10 s. Expression of the mito-TagBFP construct in (C-E) was induced by growing the cells overnight to mid-log phase in synthetic media containing 2% galactose. Scale bars, 2 μm.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.00422.00310.7554/eLife.00422.004Figure 1—figure supplement 1.ERMES subunits colocalize at mitochondrial division sites.(A) and (B) A wild-type strain expressing Mdm12-GFP (A) or Mmm1-GFP (B) and Mdm34-TdTomato from their endogenous loci and mito-TagBFP from an episomal plasmid was imaged over the course of 1.75 min on an OMX microscope as described in the ‘Materials and methods’. Scale bars, 2 μm.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.00422.004 Here, we show that ERMES and the Miro GTPase Gem1 function in the process of ERMD, which serves to couple the segregation of mitochondria and mtDNA in cells. Specifically, our data support a model in which ERMES creates ER-mitochondria contacts along the mitochondrial network that serve to link actively replicating nucleoids to mitochondrial division and the subsequent Gem1-dependent spatial resolution of newly generated mitochondrial tips. Such a mechanism is likely required for efficient mtDNA distribution throughout the cell in addition to nucleoid segregation per se, as long-range movement of nucleoids within the organelle is limited (Nunnari et al., 1997; Okamoto et al., 1998). In mammalian cells, nucleoids are similarly localized at mitochondrial division sites and mitochondrial tips, suggesting that ERMD also plays this fundamental role in humans (Garrido et al., 2003; Iborra et al., 2004). In this context, although the Miro GTPase family is highly conserved in eukaryotes, Miro orthologs are not found in organisms that lack mtDNA, such as Giardia intestinalis and Trichomonas vaginalis, and possess mitochondrial-related mitosomes or hydrogenosomes, respectively (Vlahou et al., 2011). This correlation is consistent with a fundamental role of Miro in mtDNA segregation. Also consistent with this view, gem1Δ cells lose mitochondrial DNA at a significantly higher frequency than wild-type cells (Frederick et al., 2004). All strains were constructed in either the W303 (ade2-1; leu2-3; his3-11, 15; trp1-1; ura3-1; can1-100) or BY4741 (his3Δ1; leu2Δ0; met15Δ0; ura3Δ0) genetic background, both of which have been described previously (Rothstein, 1983; Brachmann et al., 1998). ERMES components and Yme2 were tagged at their C-termini using PCR-based homologous recombination (Janke et al., 2004; Sheff and Thorn, 2004). The red fluorescent protein TdTomato (Shaner et al., 2004) was cloned into pFA6 plasmids using standard cloning techniques. Haploid cells were transformed with PCR product using the lithium acetate method and plated on synthetic media or YPD + geneticin (300 μg/ml) to select for the homologous recombination event. Correct integration of the cassette was confirmed by colony PCR, and western blotting of whole-cell protein extracts was used to verify correct protein expression. To generate gem1Δ MDM34-yEGFP or gem1Δ MDM34-mCherry strains, W303 MDM34-yEGFP::HIS5 or W303 MDM34-mCherry was mated to gem1Δ::HIS3 cells. The heterozygous diploids were sporulated, and the resulting tetrads were dissected. Two-to-two cosegregation of the histidine prototrophy was used to verify the gem1Δ MDM34-yEGFP genotype, and cosegregation of histidine prototrophy and kanamycin resistance was used to verify the gem1Δ MDM34-mCherry genotype. The yme2Δ gep4Δ and YME2-GFP gep4Δ strains were generated by mating haploid gep4Δ and yme2Δ or YME2-GFP strains, followed by tetrad dissection and identification of clones by cosegregating genetic markers.
Mitochondrial division is important for mitochondrial distribution and function. Recent data have demonstrated that ER-mitochondria contacts mark mitochondrial division sites, but the molecular basis and functions of these contacts are not understood. Here we show that in yeast, the ER-mitochondria tethering complex, ERMES, and the highly conserved Miro GTPase, Gem1, are spatially and functionally linked to ER-associated mitochondrial division. Gem1 acts as a negative regulator of ER-mitochondria contacts, an activity required for the spatial resolution and distribution of newly generated mitochondrial tips following division. Previous data have demonstrated that ERMES localizes with a subset of actively replicating mitochondrial nucleoids. We show that mitochondrial division is spatially linked to nucleoids and that a majority of these nucleoids segregate prior to division, resulting in their distribution into newly generated tips in the mitochondrial network. Thus, we postulate that ER-associated division serves to link the distribution of mitochondria and mitochondrial nucleoids in cells.
Mitochondria generate most of the energy used by cells, and they also play key roles in cellular growth, death, and differentiation. They are evolutionarily derived from bacteria and have retained their own DNA and protein translation system, but they are also dependent on the cell for their growth and replication.