 Exquisite control of extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) MAPK signalling is required for homeostasis in the epidermis and other tissues (Pouysségur et al., 2002; Kholodenko, 2006; Khavari and Rinn, 2007; Roberts and Der, 2007). ERK activation is triggered by the activation of epidermal growth factor receptors (EGFRs) through binding to their cognate ligands (Yuspa, 1994; Sibilia et al., 2007; Schneider et al., 2008). Precursors of EGFR ligands including EGF, transforming growth factor α (TGFα), and heparin binding EGF-like growth factor (HB-EGF), are generated as membrane-bound proteins and are released through cleavage by matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) including ADAM17 (Massagué and Pandiella, 1993; Sahin et al., 2004). The critical role of MMP-mediated release of EGFR ligands is corroborated by the close resemblance of the phenotypes among knockout mice of TGFα, ADAM17, and EGFR (Luetteke et al., 1993; Peschon et al., 1998; Franzke et al., 2012). However, little is known about how such cell-to-cell communication leading to activation of the Ras/ERK pathway is dynamically regulated in vivo. We recently reported Eisuke mice, which can visualise ERK activity at a single cell resolution by the expression of a Förster resonance energy transfer (FRET) biosensor for ERK (Kamioka et al., 2012). In Eisuke mice used in this study, the nuclear ERK biosensor is expressed ubiquitously under the control of the CAG promoter (Figure 1A). We imaged mainly ear epidermis of anaesthetised mice by two-photon excitation microscopy. The ear skin was stabilized between thermo-conductive silicon gum sheet and a cover glass to avoid movement derived from heart pulses and respirations (Figure 1B). Images were acquired every 5 min with a viewfield of 0.213 mm2 in 2-3 μm steps using a 25X/1.05 water-immersion objective lens (XLPLN 25XWMP; Olympus, Tokyo, Japan). In our imaging settings for two photon microscopy, skin cells were clearly imaged from hair follicles to the outer epidermal layers (stratum corneum). The level of FRET was analysed by the FRET/CFP ratio image and shown in intensity modulated display mode; eight colours from red to blue are used to represent the FRET/CFP ratio and the 32 grades of colour intensity are used to represent the signal intensity of the CFP image. The warm and cold colours indicate high and low FRET levels, namely ERK activity, respectively. Epidermal layers and dermis were clearly discerned by cellular size and collagen fibres visualised by second harmonic generation (SHG) microscopy (Figure 1C-D). Autofluorescence was negligible in the skin of control mice on the same background (FVB/N) (Figure 1—figure supplement 1). Backskin of Eisuke mice was successfully visualised by a similar method as ear skin (Figure 1—figure supplement 2).10.7554/eLife.05178.003Figure 1.In vivo imaging of ERK activity in ear skin.(A) Structure of ERK biosensor (EKAREV-NLS) expressed in Eisuke mice. (B) Experimental set-up of in vivo imaging of ear skin with a two-photon microscope. (C) Schematic of skin structure. (D) ERK activity maps in three different skin layers indicated in (C). ERK activity in the nuclei is represented by intensity modulated display (IMD) mode. The warm and cold colours indicate high and low ERK activities, respectively. Collagen fibres (magenta) were detected by second harmonic generation microscopy. *indicates sebaceous gland and **indicates hair bulge. Scale bar, 100 μm.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.05178.00310.7554/eLife.05178.004Figure 1—figure supplement 1.Autofluorescence in background FVB/N mouse.Images of CFP channel (ex 840 nm/em 480 nm) and FRET channels (ex 840 nm/em 530 nm) of an Eisuke mouse (FVB/NEKAREV−NLS) and a control FVB/N mouse. Images were acquired under the same condition and were presented with the same upper- and lower-threshold ranges to show the background fluorescence in the control FVB mouse (upper halves). In the bottom halves of the panels for the FVB/N mouse, the upper-threshold intensity is lowered to show the autofluorescence.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.05178.00410.7554/eLife.05178.005Figure 1—figure supplement 2.In vivo imaging of ERK activity in backskin.(A) Experimental set-up of in vivo imaging of backskin with a two-photon microscope. (B) ERK activity maps in dermis (left), basal layer (middle), and suprabasal layer (right) of epidermis. ERK activity in the nuclei is represented by intensity modulated display (IMD) mode. The warm and cold colours indicate high and low ERK activities, respectively. Collagen fibres (magenta) were detected by second harmonic generation microscopy. *indicates hair follicle. Scale bar, 100 μm.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.05178.005 Cell proliferation at proper time and place is essential for tissue maintenance in multicellular organisms. In steady-state skin, epidermal cells undergo continuous turnover through autonomous activation of growth signal pathway triggered by the interaction of EGFRs and their cognate receptors (Kholodenko, 2006; Khavari and Rinn, 2007). ERK plays a central role as a downstream target of a variety of growth signal pathways and its tight regulation in time, place, and degree of activation determine cell behaviours such as cell proliferation, migration, and differentiation (Pouysségur et al., 2002). Aberrant activation of ERK has been reported in many types of cancers especially by the oncogenic mutation of Ras and Raf (Roberts and Der, 2007). Despite the significance of ERK activity regulation, technical limitations have obscured how growth signal activation is generated and propagated throughout the tissue. TAPI-1 and PD0325901 were purchased from Calbiochem (San Diego, CA). PD0325901 and TPA were purchased from LC laboratories (Woburn, MA). PD153035 was purchased from MedChemexpress (Princeton, NJ).
Extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) is a key effector of many growth signalling pathways. In this study, we visualise epidermal ERK activity in living mice using an ERK FRET biosensor. Under steady-state conditions, the epidermis occasionally revealed bursts of ERK activation patterns where ERK activity radially propagated from cell to cell. The frequency of this spatial propagation of radial ERK activity distribution (SPREAD) correlated with the rate of epidermal cell division. SPREADs and proliferation were stimulated by 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol 13-acetate (TPA) in a manner dependent on EGF receptors and their cognate ligands. At the wounded skin, ERK activation propagated as trigger wave in parallel to the wound edge, suggesting that ERK activation propagation can be superimposed. Furthermore, by visualising the cell cycle, we found that SPREADs were associated with G2/M cell cycle progression. Our results provide new insights into how cell proliferation and transient ERK activity are synchronised in a living tissue.
Our skin is our largest organ; it provides a barrier that protects the underlying tissues and internal organs from the external environment and acts as one of our first lines of defense against infection. Both of these roles subject the skin to wear and tear and so it must constantly create new skin cells to replace those lost or damaged. However, if this renewal process goes awry it can lead to excessive cell growth or skin cancer. To avoid this, cells tightly regulate the pathways that stimulate skin renewal.