 The cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) Cl− channel is activated when its regulatory (R) domain is phosphorylated by cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase A (PKA) (Tabcharani et al., 1991). Mutations of CFTR cause CF disease that involves multiple organs (Knowles et al., 1983; Kerem et al., 1989; Riordan et al., 1989; Rommens et al., 1989). In the lungs of CF patients, defective CFTR leads to production of thick mucus that obstructs airways and thus predisposes the patients to recurring bacterial infection. Although CF disease originates from genetically defective CFTR protein, the severity of CF lung disease is not well correlated with genotype. The CF lung pathology is not fundamentally different from those of many other types of chronic pulmonary infectious and inflammatory diseases. Aggressive antibiotic treatment and supportive measures have prolonged the median life span of patients from 5 to 37 years (The Cystic Fibrosis Foundation, 2004). These observations underscore the profound impact of infections on progression and severity of CF lung disease. Given that the lung disease generally determines CF patients' prognosis and causes ∼90% of their morbidity and mortality, it is extremely important to effectively control or mitigate lung infections in the early stages of CF disease. Experimentally, the CFTR channels are often activated by boosting the concentration of intracellular cAMP with a combination of the adenylate cyclase activator forskolin and the phosphodiesterase inhibitor isobutylmethylxanthine (IBMX) (Csanady et al., 2000). Figure 1B shows current of CFTR heterologously expressed in a Xenopus oocyte bathed in a forskolin- and IBMX-containing solution. Following exposure to extracellular SMase C from S. aureus, the CFTR current was markedly diminished in a time-dependent manner (Figure 1C-E). To investigate whether SMase C also suppresses native CFTR current, we tested the enzyme's effect on CFTR current in Calu-3 cells (a lung epithelial cell line commonly used in CFTR research) after activating their CFTR channels with forskolin and IBMX (Figure 1F-H). As in oocytes, SMase C suppressed CFTR current in Calu-3 cells (Figure 1G-I), a result confirming that this SMase C effect on CFTR activity is not unique to the oocyte heterologous expression system. The CFTR and PKA-C cDNAs were subcloned in the pGEMHE plasmid (Liman et al., 1992). Mutant CFTR cDNAs were obtained through PCR-based mutagenesis and confirmed by DNA sequencing. The cRNAs were synthesized with T3 or T7 polymerase using the corresponding linearized cDNAs as templates. Channel currents were recorded from whole oocytes previously injected with the corresponding cRNAs and stored at 18°C, using a two-electrode voltage clamp amplifier (OC-725C; Warner, Hamden, CT), filtered at 5 kHz and sampled at 50 kHz using a Digidata 1322 interfaced to a PC. The resistance of electrodes filled with 3 M KCl was 0.2-0.3 MΩ. Molecular Devices pClamp 8 software was used for amplifier control and data acquisition. Unless specified otherwise, the bath solution contained (in mM): 95 NaCl, 5 KCl, 0.3 CaCl2, 1 MgCl2 and 10 HEPES; pH was adjusted to 7.6 with NaOH. CFTR current from the Calu-3 cell line was recorded in the whole cell configuration with a patch-clamp amplifier (200B; Axopatch), filtered at 5 kHz and sampled at 50 kHz using a Digidata 1322 interfaced to a PC. Electrodes were fire polished (2-4 MΩ) and coated with beeswax. Capacitance and series resistance were electronically compensated. Molecular Devices pClamp 8 software was used for amplifier control and data acquisition. The bath solution contained (in mM) 145 NaCl, 5 KCl, 0.3 CaCl2, 1 MgCl2, 10 HEPES (pH 7.30 adjusted with NaOH) and the electrode solution contained (in mM) 140 KCl, 10 EGTA, 1 CaCl2, 1 MgCl2, 10 HEPES (pH 7.30 adjusted with KOH). SMases were manually added to the recording chamber to test their effects.
Mutations in the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator (CFTR) cause recurring bacterial infection in CF patients' lungs. However, the severity of CF lung disease correlates poorly with genotype. Antibiotic treatment helps dramatically prolong patients' life. The lung disease generally determines prognosis and causes most morbidity and mortality; early control of infections is thus critical. Staphylococcus aureus is a main cause of early infection in CF lungs. It secretes sphingomyelinase (SMase) C that can suppress CFTR activity. SMase C also inhibits voltage-gated K+ channels in lymphocytes; inhibition of these channels causes immunosuppression. SMase C's pathogenicity is further illustrated by the demonstration that once Bacillus anthracis is engineered to express high levels of SMase C, the resulting mutant can evade the host immunity elicited by a live vaccine because additional pathogenic mechanisms are created. By screening a chemical library, we find that the natural product tannic acid is an SMase C antidote.
Cystic fibrosis is an inherited disease that mainly affects the lungs and the intestine. It is caused by defective copies of a protein called CFTR, which normally allows chloride ions to flow in and out of cells through the cell membrane. The activity of the CFTR protein is important for transferring fluid in and out of cells, and the dysfunctional CTFR protein causes the cells lining the lungs and the intestine to produce thick mucus. This leads to problems with breathing and absorbing nutrients, and makes the lungs of people with cystic fibrosis more susceptible to infections.