 Mucus is secreted by specialized cells that line the respiratory and digestive tract to protect against pathogens and other forms of cellular abuse. The secretion of mucus is therefore essential for the normal physiology of the wet mucosal epithelium (Rubin, 2010). The secretory or gel-forming mucin, Mucin 5AC (MUC5AC) is one of the major components of the mucus in the airways, and hyper- or hyposecretion of this component is a hallmark of a number of chronic obstructive pulmonary diseases (COPD) (Rose and Voynow, 2006). MUC5AC is also expressed at low levels in the gastrointestinal tract and, surprisingly, expressed de novo, and upregulated in colonic mucus from cancer and ulcerative colitis patients (Bartman et al., 1999; Kocer et al., 2002; Byrd and Bresalier, 2004; Forgue-Lafitte et al., 2007; Bu et al., 2010). MUC5AC is also expressed in response to parasitic infection, which is probably its additional physiological role (Hasnain et al., 2011). The human colonic adenocarcinoma cells HT29-18N2 (N2) differentiate to goblet cells upon starvation in protein-free medium (Phillips et al., 1995), which increases the production of MUC5AC. Immunofluorescence analysis of accumulated MUC5AC in secretory granules (Figure 1A) shows the differences between starved and nonstarved cells. The increase in protein production of MUC5AC after starvation was confirmed by dot-blotting cell lysates of nonstarved and starved N2 cells (Figure 1B). Quantification of the dot blot revealed a 45-fold increase of MUC5AC protein levels in starved N2 cells compared to nonstarved N2 cells. Our findings with the dot-blot procedure confirm the lack of MUC5AC production in Hela cells (Figure 1B,C). MUC5AC mRNA analysis by quantitative real-time PCR also confirmed increased MUC5AC mRNA levels in starved cells (Figure 1D). The fusion of MUC5AC-containing granules with the plasma membrane requires an external signal, which results in the production of DAG and the release of Ca2+ from internal stores. To induce mucin secretion from the starved N2 cells, we used the DAG mimic, phorbol-12-myristate-13-acetate (PMA). Starved goblet cells were treated for 2 hr with 2 µM PMA to induce MUC5AC secretion (Figure 1E). The extracellular MUC5AC expands and coats the cell surface (Figure 1E). We took advantage of the stickiness of the mucin film to quantitate secreted MUC5AC. After 2 hr incubation with PMA, the cells were fixed with paraformaldehyde followed by incubation with an anti-MUC5AC antibody and a secondary fluorescent-labeled antibody to visualize secreted mucin (Figure 1E). To detect the intracellular pool of MUC5AC after PMA-induced release, the cells were washed extensively to remove secreted MUC5AC and then fixed with paraformaldehyde, permeabilized and processed for immunofluorescence microscopy with an anti-MUC5AC antibody as described above (Figure 1E).10.7554/eLife.00658.003Figure 1.Mucin synthesis and secretion from goblet cells.(A) Nonstarved and starved N2 cells were fixed and analyzed by immunofluorescence microscopy with an anti-MUC5AC antibody (green). The nuclear DNA was stained with DAPI (blue) to localize the position of the nucleus. (B) Dot blot of total lysates of nonstarved, starved N2 and HeLa cells were probed with anti-MUC5AC and anti-actin antibody. (C) The dot blots in (B) were quantified and normalized to actin levels. The y-axis represents relative values with respect to the values of nonstarved N2 cells. Average values plus-minus SEM are plotted as bar graphs (N = 3). (D) Nonstarved and 5 days starved N2 cells were lysed and total RNA was extracted for quantitative real-time PCR analysis. The values for MUC5AC mRNA levels were normalized to the values of the housekeeping gene HPRT1. The y-axis represents relative values with respect to nonstarved N2 cells. Average values plus-minus SEM are plotted as bar graphs (N = 4). (E) Starved N2 cells were treated for 2 hr with 2 μM PMA. To detect the remaining intracellular mucin after PMA release, the secreted mucin was removed by DTT and trypsin treatment of the goblet cells prior to fixation (experimental procedures). After fixation, cells were permeabilized and examined by immunofluorescence microscopy with DAPI and an anti-MUC5AC antibody. Secreted MUC5AC was detected by fixing the secreted mucus directly on the cells after PMA treatment, followed by immunofluorescence microscopy using an anti-MUC5AC specific antibody.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.00658.003 There are 17 different kinds of mucin genes and their products are either secreted or transported and inserted into the plasma membrane. The secreted gel-forming mucins MUC2, MUC5AC, MUC5B and MUC6 are produced by goblet cells, which are present in the epithelia and submucosal glands of the respiratory and gastrointestinal tract (Thornton et al., 2008; McGuckin et al., 2011). Surprisingly, human pathologies such as colon cancer and ulcerative colitis produce MUC5AC de novo, which is then secreted (Bartman et al., 1999; Kocer et al., 2002; Forgue-Lafitte et al., 2007; Bu et al., 2010). In general, mucins are produced as a result of cell differentiation and the newly synthesized mucins, like all other secretory proteins, are transported from the ER to the Golgi membranes. In the Golgi complex, the secreted forms of mucins are sorted and packed into granules; the granules mature, fuse with the plasma membrane, predominantly by the influx of Ca2+ into the cells, and release their content. In cells of the gastro-intestinal lining (Bou-Hanna et al., 1994; Barcelo et al., 2001; Bertrand et al., 2004) and eye conjunctiva (Li et al., 2012) influx of extracellular Ca2+ participates in the release of mucins from the secretory granules. Ca2+-dependent events are also essential for the release of mucins from the respiratory tract, however, the source of Ca2+ is unclear. The general view is that mucin secretion in the airways is dependent on Ca2+ release from intracellular stores and independent of extracellular Ca2+ (Kemp et al., 2004; Davis and Dickey, 2008). However, extracellular Ca2+ is required for mucin secretion from cholinergic stimulated swine airway submucosal glands (Lu et al., 2011) as well as by cold and menthol stimulated human bronchial epithelial cells (Li et al., 2011). The involvement of extracellular Ca2+ in mucin secretion is therefore likely to be cell type, signal, and mucin specific. The synthesis and secretion of mucins is controlled by a large number of distinct stimuli, which poses additional problems for the identification of proteins involved in mucin homeostasis (Forstner et al., 1994; Stanley and Phillips, 1994; Epple et al., 1997; Slomiany and Slomiany, 2005). All chemicals were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO) except BAPTA-AM (Biomol International, Farmingdale, NY), Latrunculin A (Calbiochem, Billerica, MA), Jasplakinolide (Life Technologies, Carlsbad, CA) and KB-R7943 (Tocris Bioscience, Bristol, UK), anti-MUC5AC antibody clone 45M1 (Neomarkers, Waltham, MA), anti-GRASP65 C-20 antibody from Santa Cruz Biotechnology (Dallas, TX), anti-actin antibody clone AC-15 from Sigma-Aldrich anti-β tubulin antibody from Sigma-Aldrich and anti-HA antibody clone 3f10 from Roche (Basel, Switzerland). Secondary antibodies for immunofluorescence microscopy and dot blotting were from Life Technologies.
Mucin 5AC (MUC5AC) is secreted by goblet cells of the respiratory tract and, surprisingly, also expressed de novo in mucus secreting cancer lines. siRNA-mediated knockdown of 7343 human gene products in a human colonic cancer goblet cell line (HT29-18N2) revealed new proteins, including a Ca2+-activated channel TRPM5, for MUC5AC secretion. TRPM5 was required for PMA and ATP-induced secretion of MUC5AC from the post-Golgi secretory granules. Stable knockdown of TRPM5 reduced a TRPM5-like current and ATP-mediated Ca2+ signal. ATP-induced MUC5AC secretion depended strongly on Ca2+ influx, which was markedly reduced in TRPM5 knockdown cells. The difference in ATP-induced Ca2+ entry between control and TRPM5 knockdown cells was abrogated in the absence of extracellular Ca2+ and by inhibition of the Na+/Ca2+ exchanger (NCX). Accordingly, MUC5AC secretion was reduced by inhibition of NCX. Thus TRPM5 activation by ATP couples TRPM5-mediated Na+ entry to promote Ca2+ uptake via an NCX to trigger MUC5AC secretion.
Goblet cells are specialized cells that produce proteins called mucins, which combine with water, salt and other proteins to form mucus, the slippery fluid that protects the respiratory and digestive tracts from bacteria, viruses and other pathogens. However, a defect in the production of one particular type of mucin—Mucin 5AC—can result in diseases such as cystic fibrosis, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and Crohn’s disease, so there is a clear need to understand the production of mucus in detail.