 All organisms live within a given thermal range, beyond which growth and fecundity decrease (Pörtner et al., 2006). Partly as a result, organisms tend to distribute in the ocean and on land according to latitude as well as depth and altitude, although other elements such as availability of food and light also play a role in shaping preferred habitats (Pörtner, 2002; Pörtner et al., 2006; Prasad et al., 2011). Despite their importance, the mechanisms that set the thermal limits remain incompletely understood. We determined embryonic viability in a range of temperatures for Caenorhabditis elegans and Caenorhabditis briggsae and operationally defined the thermal limits as the upper and lower edges of the temperature range within which >90% of embryos hatched. We thus found that the thermal limits of C. elegans were of 12°C and 25°C (Figure 1A), and those of C. briggsae of 14°C and 27°C (Figure 1B), in line with the fact that C. briggsae usually lives in warmer climates than C. elegans (Prasad et al., 2011). The thermal range defined by these upper and lower limits ensures robust propagation of the population and is narrower than merely the reproductive range for C. elegans (9°C-26°C [Anderson et al., 2011]) or C. briggsae (14°C-30°C [Anderson et al., 2007; Prasad et al., 2011]).10.7554/eLife.04810.003Figure 1.Defining the thermal range and quantifications.(A and B) Progeny tests were performed on acclimated C. elegans worms from 7.5°C to 27°C and C. briggsae worms from 9°C to 30°C. Dotted line highlights 90% embryonic viability. Temperatures below 20°C exhibiting less than 90% viability are shown in cyan, temperatures above 20°C exhibiting less than 90% viability in magenta. Between panels A and B, we show the thermal range of each species. Error bars show SEM. (C-F) Stills from a time-lapse temperature-controlled DIC microscopy recording of a first-cell stage embryo at the indicated stages (G-J) Examples of feature quantification at the different cellular stages (24°C): female pronucleus speed (G), pronuclei position during centration-rotation (H), spindle pole oscillations (I), as well as areas of the AB (anterior) and P1 (posterior) daughter cells (J). See ‘Materials and methods’ for details on the quantifications. Figure 1—figure supplement 1 shows the temperature control setup. Figure 1—source data 1 lists all the quantified features and their thermal response within and beyond the thermal range.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.04810.00310.7554/eLife.04810.004Figure 1—source data 1.Quantified features.List of features that were quantified and their thermal responses within and beyond the thermal range for C. elegans (N2). Within the thermal range, features were categorized as ‘temperature-dependent’ if the Pearson correlation p-value was below 0.0014 = 0.05/35 (see ‘Materials and methods’ for Bonferroni correction; ‘temperature-independent’ is shown underlined). Beyond the thermal limit, we performed an F-test to determine if the thermal response of the feature was changing compared to within the thermal range (see ‘Materials and methods’; we indicated a change in thermal response when the F-test p-value was below 0.0014, highlighted in bold). Abbreviations: PC: pseudo-cleavage, PM: pronuclear meeting, ME: mitotic entry, T: temperature, C/R: centration-rotation, MT: microtubules. The following features were also quantified but displayed no consistent thermal response both within and beyond the thermal range and hence were not included in the table: anterior-most position at the end of C/R, number of anterior and posterior oscillations, spindle position at the onset of oscillations.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.04810.00410.7554/eLife.04810.005Figure 1—figure supplement 1.Temperature-control setup.(A) The temperature within the sample was measured using a thin thermocouple of type K (see ‘Materials and methods’), connected to a temperature controller. This temperature feedback was used to control the temperature of the air blown on the sample and objective, so that sample and set temperatures always matched. (B) We verified that the temperature controller was well calibrated over the range of temperatures of interest by checking the temperature on the sample with yet another thermocouple connected to a separate external thermometer at the same time. We report the measured temperature on the sample by the temperature controller and external thermometer. The measured imprecision was of the order of 0.2°C at all temperatures.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.04810.005 All the strains were maintained according to standard procedures (Brenner, 1974) in incubators set at the temperature at which embryos would then be imaged. Note, however, that since C. elegans was not fully viable above 25°C (see Figure 1A), worms were kept at the imaging temperature for only 6-24 hr prior to imaging. Embryos were dissected in 1× M9 medium tempered at the culture temperature, mounted on slides, placed under a coverslip and imaged using time-lapse DIC microscopy. Considering the crowded compressive environment of the uterus in the intact animal, and considering furthermore that the same mounting procedure was followed for all specimens at all temperatures, we surmise that the observed alterations in thermal response of embryo size and shape at given temperatures are not due to the mounting procedure. However, we cannot totally exclude that the observed changes in embryo size and shape may result from differential resilience to pressure of the cover slip used for imaging at the various temperatures.
All organisms live within a given thermal range, but little is known about the mechanisms setting the limits of this range. We uncovered cellular features exhibiting signature changes at thermal limits in Caenorhabditis elegans embryos. These included changes in embryo size and shape, which were also observed in Caenorhabditis briggsae, indicating evolutionary conservation. We hypothesized that such changes could reflect restricted aerobic capacity at thermal limits. Accordingly, we uncovered that relative respiration in C. elegans embryos decreases at the thermal limits as compared to within the thermal range. Furthermore, by compromising components of the respiratory chain, we demonstrated that the reliance on aerobic metabolism is reduced at thermal limits. Moreover, embryos thus compromised exhibited signature changes in size and shape already within the thermal range. We conclude that restricted aerobic metabolism at the thermal limits contributes to setting the thermal range in a metazoan organism.
An organism can thrive within a certain range of temperatures, beyond which it is less able to grow and reproduce. Different species are adapted to live in environments of different temperatures and this influences where on the planet they can be found.