 Endocytosis has central roles in many cell biological processes (Le Roy and Wrana, 2005; Doherty and McMahon, 2009). Since the mid-nineties evidence has accumulated to suggest that mammalian cells utilise additional endocytic mechanisms beyond clathrin-coated pits (Sandvig and van Deurs, 1994; Mayor and Pagano, 2007; Sandvig et al., 2008). Whilst the molecular detail of how clathrin-coated pits work is understood in ever-increasing detail (Kirchhausen et al., 2014), similarly complete mechanistic descriptions of how endocytosis may take place outside of clathrin-coated pits are lacking. We sought to establish endocytic assays and protein labelling strategies to satisfy four main requirements: (1) achieve very high topological specificity in discrimination between endocytosed and extracellular protein, (2) provide a means to analyse all, or nearly all, surface proteins simultaneously, (3) provide high signal to noise, and thereby high temporal resolution for detection of primary endocytic vesicles, and (4) allow a means to follow uptake of specific cargoes. An imaging approach to studying endocytosis in unperturbed cells, where all surface proteins are labelled, is intrinsically easier to interpret than experiments where mutant proteins, siRNA, or chemical inhibitors cause loss of function, and potentially indirect or off-target effects, over days. The use of small, monovalent reducible chemical labels provides high temporal resolution, signal-to-noise ratio and efficiency of topological discrimination between intracellular and extracellular protein. This has allowed us to follow endocytosis of effectively all proteins, and thereby to observe all endocytic intermediates formed by the cell at specific time-points, starting with as little as 20 s of internalisation. Our results are at some variance with previous studies from our own and other laboratories, and with our preconceptions before being confronted with the data (Hansen and Nichols, 2009). HeLa, RPE and Cos7 cells where cultured at 37°C, 10% CO2, in DMEM supplemented with 10% FBS. When required, cells were transfected with FugeneHD (Promega, Madison, WI), 14-20 hr before imaging.
Several different endocytic pathways have been proposed to function in mammalian cells. Clathrin-coated pits are well defined, but the identity, mechanism and function of alternative pathways have been controversial. Here we apply universal chemical labelling of plasma membrane proteins to define all primary endocytic vesicles, and labelling of specific proteins with a reducible SNAP-tag substrate. These approaches provide high temporal resolution and stringent discrimination between surface-connected and intracellular membranes. We find that at least 95% of the earliest detectable endocytic vesicles arise from clathrin-coated pits. GPI-anchored proteins, candidate cargoes for alternate pathways, are also found to enter the cell predominantly via coated pits. Experiments employing a mutated clathrin adaptor reveal distinct mechanisms for sorting into coated pits, and thereby explain differential effects on the uptake of transferrin and GPI-anchored proteins. These data call for a revision of models for the activity and diversity of endocytic pathways in mammalian cells.
Cells are enclosed by a ‘plasma membrane’ that allows nutrients and certain small molecules to move in and out of cells. Larger molecules—such as proteins—are carried into cells through a process known as endocytosis, where part of the plasma membrane engulfs the molecule and transports it through the cell inside a bubble-like compartment called a vesicle.