 Centromeres are essential for proper cell division. During mitosis, a transient structure called the kinetochore is assembled onto centromeric chromatin, which mediates the interaction between DNA and the mitotic spindle (Allshire and Karpen, 2008; Cheeseman and Desai, 2008). Intriguingly, although centromeres are directly embedded in chromatin, specific DNA sequences are neither necessary nor sufficient for centromere function. This is best exemplified by the rare occurrence, within the human population, of neocentromeres: functional centromeres that have repositioned to atypical loci on the chromosome (Amor et al., 2004; Marshall et al., 2008; du Sart et al., 1997; Voullaire et al., 1993). Rather than centromeric sequences, the primary candidate for epigenetic specification of centromeres is the histone variant CENP-A, which replaces canonical H3 in centromeric nucleosomes (Palmer et al., 1987, 1991; Stoler et al., 1995; Henikoff et al., 2000; Yoda et al., 2000). CENP-A chromatin is sufficient for recruitment of the downstream centromere and kinetochore complexes (Foltz et al., 2006; Okada et al., 2006; Carroll et al., 2009, 2010; Barnhart et al., 2011; Guse et al., 2011; Mendiburo et al., 2011). In addition, CENP-A is stably transmitted at centromeres during mitotic (Jansen et al., 2007; Bodor et al., 2013) and meiotic (Raychaudhuri et al., 2012) divisions, and its assembly is tightly cell cycle controlled (Jansen et al., 2007; Schuh et al., 2007; Silva et al., 2012). Importantly, targeting of this protein to an ectopic site of the genome is sufficient to initiate an epigenetic feedback loop, recruiting more CENP-A to this site (Mendiburo et al., 2011). However, little is known about the quantity of CENP-A present at centromeres, despite this being an essential parameter for a functional understanding of both centromeric architecture and epigenetic inheritance. Here, we use multiple, independent approaches to determine the absolute copy number of CENP-A at centromeres. In addition, we provide novel insights in the mechanisms of centromere size control. To determine absolute centromeric CENP-A levels in human cells, we set out to build cell lines in which the entire CENP-A pool is fluorescent. To accomplish this, we removed a significant and essential portion of the CENP-A gene to create a knock-out allele in stably diploid, human retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) cells (Figure 1A, bottom). Subsequently, a fluorescent knock-in allele was created by placing GFP or YFP encoding sequences in frame with the sole remaining CENP-A gene (Figure 1A, middle). Specifically, we have built the following endogenously targeted RPE cell lines: CA+/−, CAG/−, CAY/−, and CA+/F (where + = wild-type; − = knock-out; G = GFP knock-in; Y = YFP knock-in; F = floxed [to control for potential gene-targeting artifacts]; Figure 1—figure supplement 1A). Western blot analysis confirms that CAG/− and CAY/− cells exclusively contain tagged CENP-A (of ∼43 kDa), while CA+/+ (wild-type), CA+/F, and CA+/− cells only express wild-type CENP-A (∼16 kDa) protein (Figure 1B). Importantly, heterozygous expression or tagging of endogenous loci did not interfere with cell viability.10.7554/eLife.02137.003Figure 1.CENP-A levels are regulated by mass-action.(A) Schematic of gene-targeting strategy that allowed for the creation of CENP-A knockout and fluorescent knock-in alleles. The region encoding the essential CENP-A targeting domain (CATD, Black et al., 2007) is indicated. (B) Quantitative immunoblots of CENP-A, HJURP, and Mis18BP1 in differentially targeted RPE cell lines. α-tubulin is used as a loading control. (C) Immunofluorescence images of same cell lines as in B. CENP-A intensity is represented in a heat map as indicated on the right. The fold difference ± SEM (n is biological replicates) compared to wild-type RPE cells is indicated below. Scale bar: 10 μm. Note that in contrast to quantification of immunoblots, immunofluoresce detection of untagged and tagged CENP-A is directly comparable. (D) Quantification of centromeric CENP-A levels (from C) by immunofluorescence (IF) and total CENP-A levels (n = 4-9 independent experiments as in B) by western blot (WB). All cell lines expressing untagged CENP-A are normalized to CA+/+ while those expressing tagged CENP-A are normalized to the centromeric CAY/− levels measured in C, as indicated by dashed lines. (E) Correlation of centromeric and total cellular CENP-A levels as measured in D. Dashed line represents a predicted directly proportional relationship with indicated correlation coefficients. Throughout, the average ± SEM is indicated. (F) Quantification of centromeric CENP-A levels in synchronized HeLa cells (based on anti-CENP-A staining) within a single cell cycle after transient transfection of indicated proteins. Asterisk indicates statistically significant increase compared to control or indicated transfections (one-tailed t test; p<0.05; n = 3); NS indicates no significant increase. Average ± SEM of three independent experiments is shown.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.02137.00310.7554/eLife.02137.004Figure 1—figure supplement 1.CENP-A expression is the rate limiting factor for centromeric CENP-A levels.(A) Pedigree of targeted RPE cell lines used in this study. Uninterrupted lines indicate single gene-targeting events, interrupted lines indicate multiple sequential gene-targeting events, and dashed lines indicate stable ectopic protein expression. (B-C) Correlation of centromeric CENP-A and total cellular HJURP (B) or Mis18BP1 levels (C). Insets show quantification of total protein levels from Figure 1B; n = 3-5 independent experiments. Dashed lines represent hypothetical directly proportional relationships with indicated correlation coefficients. In the insets, the average ± SEM (n = 3-5) is shown.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.02137.004 It has been proposed that centromeres in budding yeast feature a single nucleosome of CENP-ACse4 (Meluh et al., 1998; Furuyama and Biggins, 2007). For this reason, the yeast centromere cluster has been extensively used to calibrate fluorescence intensities of CENP-A and other proteins from a number of species (Joglekar et al., 2006, 2008; Johnston et al., 2010; Schittenhelm et al., 2010). However, the single nucleosome hypothesis has recently been challenged (Coffman et al., 2011; Lawrimore et al., 2011; Haase et al., 2013). To avoid dependency on any single reference, we used three independent methods to measure the human centromeric CENP-A copy number. One strategy uses intrinsically controlled fluorescence ratios of cellular and centromeric CENP-A-YFP signals (Figure 2A). The second method does not rely directly on fluorescence intensities, but rather on the stochastic redistribution of CENP-A (Figure 5A). Finally, we compared CENP-A signals directly to a calibrated fluorescent standard (Figure 5E). Importantly, despite the independent nature of these strategies, they all come to a very similar conclusion. Therefore, we demonstrate that typical centromeres in human RPE cells contain ∼400 molecules of CENP-A. While there is a continuing debate on the composition of CENP-A nucleosomes (Black and Cleveland, 2011; Henikoff and Furuyama, 2012), current evidence, at least in human cells, strongly favors an octameric arrangement harboring two copies of CENP-A (Sekulic et al., 2010; Tachiwana et al., 2011; Bassett et al., 2012; Hasson et al., 2013; Padeganeh et al., 2013). Hence, our numbers, correspond to 200 CENP-A nucleosomes in interphase, which are split into 100 nucleosomes on mitotic chromosomes (Figure 8B). All human cell lines used were grown at 37°C, 5% CO2. Cells were grown in DMEM/F-12 (RPE), DMEM (HeLa, U2OS, PDNC-4), MEM (primary fibroblasts; Coriell GM06170), McCoy's 5A (HCT-116), or RPMI-1640 (DLD-1) cell culture media. Media were supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS), 2 mM glutamine, 1 mM sodium pyruvate (SP), 100 U/ml penicillin, and 100 μg/ml streptomycin, with the following exceptions: for RPE cells SP was substituted for 14.5 mM sodium bicarbonate; for HeLa newborn calf serum was used instead of FBS; for fibroblasts 15% FBS was used; for DLD-1 cells SP was omitted; and both SP and glutamine were omitted for HCT-116 cells. During live cell imaging, culture medium was replaced with Leibowitz's L-15 medium containing 10% FBS and 2 mM glutamine. LacI-GFP::LacO HCT-116 cells (gift from Duane Compton, Thompson and Compton, 2011) were selected alternatingly with 2 μg/ml blasticidin and 300 μg/ml hygromycin; PDNC-4 cells were selected with 100 μg/ml neomycin. All media and supplements were purchased from Gibco (Paisley, UK).
The centromere, responsible for chromosome segregation during mitosis, is epigenetically defined by CENP-A containing chromatin. The amount of centromeric CENP-A has direct implications for both the architecture and epigenetic inheritance of centromeres. Using complementary strategies, we determined that typical human centromeres contain ∼400 molecules of CENP-A, which is controlled by a mass-action mechanism. This number, despite representing only ∼4% of all centromeric nucleosomes, forms a ∼50-fold enrichment to the overall genome. In addition, although pre-assembled CENP-A is randomly segregated during cell division, this amount of CENP-A is sufficient to prevent stochastic loss of centromere function and identity. Finally, we produced a statistical map of CENP-A occupancy at a human neocentromere and identified nucleosome positions that feature CENP-A in a majority of cells. In summary, we present a quantitative view of the centromere that provides a mechanistic framework for both robust epigenetic inheritance of centromeres and the paucity of neocentromere formation.
The genetic information in a cell is packed into structures called chromosomes. These contain strands of DNA wrapped around proteins called histones, which helps the long DNA chains to fit inside the relatively small nucleus of the cell.