 Tissues undergo continuous rearrangements that require tightly balanced exchanges of mechanical forces between individual cells through cadherin-mediated cell-cell junctions. The importance of mechanical coupling between cells has been documented for diverse multi-cellular processes, including tissue morphogenesis during development (Mammoto and Ingber, 2010; Martin et al., 2010; Rauzi et al., 2010; Lecuit et al., 2011; Weber et al., 2012), collective migration during wound healing (Trepat et al., 2009; Tambe et al., 2011; Ng et al., 2012), epithelial and endothelial barrier functions (Tzima et al., 2005; Twiss et al., 2012), and cancer progression (Friedl et al., 2004; Bajpai et al., 2009). In all these processes, the spatiotemporal regulation of mechanical forces is essential for the maintenance of tissue integrity as well as for communication and coordination between cells. Nevertheless, it is yet unclear how the magnitude and length scale of cell-cell force transmission are modulated dynamically as a function of cell position and topological changes within a cellular ensemble. Moreover, as recent studies have begun to characterize the molecular basis of the mechano-responsiveness of the cadherin-catenin complex (Gomez et al., 2011; Leckband et al., 2011), it is important to understand how the recruitment and regulation of cadherin molecules at the adherens junctions are coupled to cell-cell force transmission. Our first step in implementing high-resolution quantification of cell-cell forces built on the force-balancing principle was introduced in previous studies (Liu et al., 2010; Maruthamuthu et al., 2011; McCain et al., 2012). The principle states that traction forces exerted by a single cell, or by a cluster of cells, are in mechanical equilibrium with the extracellular substrate. Hence, the traction forces integrated over the footprint of a single cell or a cell cluster must be equal to zero (Figure 1; see ‘The force-balancing principle and its application to larger cell clusters’ in ‘Materials and methods’ section). Following from this, if the integrated traction force over the footprint of an individual cell within a cell cluster is non-zero, other cells in the cluster must balance it by force transmission through cell-cell adhesions. Thus, the residual traction force for a particular cell within a cluster determines the vectorial sum of external forces this cell experiences through cell-cell adhesions (Equation 1 in ‘Materials and methods’). In the case of a cell pair, each cell has one interface. Therefore, the residual forces associated with each of the two cells are—within the noise limits of traction force reconstruction—of equal magnitudes but opposite directions and indicate the force exchanged through that interface.10.7554/eLife.03282.003Figure 1.Calculation of cell-cell forces from traction forces.Single cells and cell clusters (depicted in cartoon and graphical network representations for up to four cells, with areas Ω1-Ω4) exert traction forces on the substrate (red vectors; T⇀(x⇀)). Integration of traction forces over the footprint (color-shaded boundaries) of a single cell (column 1) or an entire cell cluster (columns 2-4) yields a balanced net force of 0. In cell pairs and clusters with a ‘tree-like’ topology (columns 2 and 3), forces exchanged at each cell-cell junction can be determined by partitioning the cluster into two sub-networks and calculating the residual force required to balance the traction forces integrated over the footprint of each sub-network. See ‘Materials and methods’ for details. In cell clusters with a ‘loop’ topology (column 4), individual cell-cell junctions do not fully partition the cluster into disjoint sub-networks. In such cases, force transmission within a cell cluster can be calculated based on a model that describes the cluster as a thin-plate in mechanical equilibrium with the traction forces. The corresponding stress distribution inside the thin-plate is computed by the finite element method (FEM).DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.03282.003 Using our generalized cell-cell force measurement and analysis method, we quantified, spatially and temporally, the transmission of mechanical forces through cell-cell junctions of dynamic adherent epithelial clusters. Combined with image analyses of cell-cell junction configurations and rearrangements in the living cell clusters, our data provided unprecedented statistical power and time resolution to address questions regarding force distributions and fluctuations within cell clusters, as well as their coupling to the recruitment of molecular components of adherens junctions (Maruthamuthu et al., 2011). MCF10A expressing E-cadherin-GFP were generated by retroviral infection with LZBOB-neo-E-cadherin-GFP expression vector (gift of MJ Wheelock and AB Reynolds (Fukumoto et al., 2008)) and selected with neomyocin (300 µg/ml). For experiments with mosaic cell clusters containing control cells intermixed with cells with knock-down of myosin-IIA or talin-1, MCF10A-E-cadherin-GFP cells that also expressed H2B-mCherry were used, such that the nuclear marker could serve to distinguish between the control and the knock-down cells. MCF10A-E-cadherin-GFP cells that also expressed H2B-mCherry were generated by infection with the pBabe-H2B-mCherry retroviral vector and selected with hygromycin (300 µg/ml). All MCF10A cells were maintained in DMEM/F12 media supplemented with 5% horse serum, 20 ng/ml EGF, 0.5 mg/ml hydrocortisone, 100 ng/ml cholera toxin, 10 µg/ml insulin, and 1× penicillin/streptomycin, as described previously (http://brugge.med.harvard.edu/protocols) (Debnath et al., 2003).
Force transduction at cell-cell adhesions regulates tissue development, maintenance and adaptation. We developed computational and experimental approaches to quantify, with both sub-cellular and multi-cellular resolution, the dynamics of force transmission in cell clusters. Applying this technology to spontaneously-forming adherent epithelial cell clusters, we found that basal force fluctuations were coupled to E-cadherin localization at the level of individual cell-cell junctions. At the multi-cellular scale, cell-cell force exchange depended on the cell position within a cluster, and was adaptive to reconfigurations due to cell divisions or positional rearrangements. Importantly, force transmission through a cell required coordinated modulation of cell-matrix adhesion and actomyosin contractility in the cell and its neighbors. These data provide insights into mechanisms that could control mechanical stress homeostasis in dynamic epithelial tissues, and highlight our methods as a resource for the study of mechanotransduction in cell-cell adhesions.
The intestines, liver, and skin are all examples of organs that perform specific functions. Organs are comprised of tissues, which are themselves made up of cells. Epithelial tissue is one of the four basic types of tissue found in animals, and it occurs in almost every organ in the body. For example, epithelial tissue makes up the outermost layer of the skin, and the lining of the lungs and the intestines; the cells in epithelial tissues are attached to one another via ‘adhesion molecules’.