 Iron is critical to the function of a variety of proteins, including hemoglobin and myoglobin, various iron-sulfur proteins, and the electron transport chain. In addition, iron is a necessary component in the secretory pathway. For example, lysyl hydroxylase (LH, also referred to as PLOD) and collagen prolyl 4-hydroxylases (P4Hs) are two post-translational modifying enzymes localized to the lumen of endoplasmic reticulum, which use Fe2+ as a cofactor (Tuderman et al., 1977; Pirskanen et al., 1996). These two enzymes are critical for the synthesis of collagen, a crucial part of the basement membrane, and are formed by a complicated process involving multiple co- or post-translational modifications (Myllyharju and Kivirikko, 2004). While the types of collagens and genes found in mammals are very complex, only one type of collagen IV, encoded by two genes Viking (Vkg) and Cg25C, is found in Drosophila, and it constitutes a major structural component of basement membranes in the developing fly (Fessler and Fessler, 1989). BLASTP searches using the amino acid sequences of mammalian ZIP family members revealed that the Drosophila genome encodes at least eight putative ZIP proteins (Lye et al., 2012; Qin et al., 2013). Among them, the protein encoded by CG7816 shares the highest overall homology with human ZIP13 (45% identity and 58% similarity) (Figure 1A), and was named dZIP13 accordingly. In the phylogenetic tree, dZIP13 clusters together with hZIP13 and several other members including catsup (CG10449) and hZIP7 (Figure 1B), all belonging to the LIV-1 subfamily of zinc transporters or LZT proteins (Taylor and Nicholson, 2003). Several typical features of ZIP family members (Jeong and Eide, 2013) are found in dZIP13, including eight transmembrane domains (TM), particularly amphipathic TM4 and TM5, and a predicted extracellular/luminal location of both the amino and carboxyl termini. Notably for dZIP13 and hZIP13, there is only a single His residue in a generally histidine-rich region (2-14 His) between TM3 and TM4. The highly conserved potential metalloprotease His-Glu-X-X-His (HEXXH, where X is any amino acid) motif, located within TM5 (Bin et al., 2011) of LZT proteins, is also found in dZIP13 (Figure 1A).10.7554/eLife.03191.003Figure 1.Sequence analysis of Drosophila ZIP13.(A) Alignment of Drosophila ZIP13 (dZIP13, the top), human ZIP13 (hZIP13, the middle), and human ZIP4 (hZIP4, the bottom) proteins. Amino acid sequences for hZIP13, hZIP4, and dZIP13 (CG7816) were obtained from GenBank and aligned by HMHMM software. Black and pink shadings indicate respectively identical and conservative amino acids. The eight putative transmembrane (TM) regions are underlined and denoted as ‘TM I’ through ‘TM VIII’. (B) Phylogenetic tree analysis of human and putative Drosophila ZIP family members. The tree was generated using ClustalX version 1.81 and displayed with TreeView. Bootstrap probabilities for major clusters are shown by percentages. Accession numbers are listed for other Drosophila ZIPs used for the alignment.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.03191.003 We presented substantial evidence establishing that dZIP13 mediates iron export to the secretory pathway, identifying dZIP13 as the elusive iron transporter in the secretory pathway. Moreover, this is the first time to report that a member of the ZIP transporter family functions as an iron exporter. Previously, certain members of ZIPs, such as ZIP14 (Liuzzi et al., 2006) and ZIP8 (Wang et al., 2012), have been reported to be capable of transporting iron. However, they are only complex, broad-scope metal-ion importers and their in vivo involvement in iron homeostasis is yet to be established. Our in vivo studies clearly demonstrated that expressional alteration of dZIP13 mainly affects iron instead of zinc metabolism. Modulating dZIP13 expression in the gut cell resulted in opposite iron changes in the cytosol and secretory organelles, and radioisotope iron transport assay further showed that dZIP13 mediates iron exporting, providing compelling evidence in supporting dZIP13 as an iron efflux pump. Future biochemistry/biophysical work is needed to decipher the exact mechanistic detail of the transportation process and evidences thus obtained may further substantiate the conclusion of dZIP13 as an iron exporter. Constructs used for transgenic flies include pUAST-dZIP13 and pUAST-Golgi-mRFP. pUAST-dZIP13 was generated by PCR amplification of the coding region of CG7816 from Drosophila cDNA and cloning into pUAST using the following primers: pUAST-dZIP13 F: 5′-GGAATTCAGCCGAAAATGACCACGAACAG-3′, pUAST-dZIP13 R: 5′-ATAAGAATGCGGCCGCCCTAGTGTTCGAATAGCATGGTCATC-3′; pUAST-Golgi-mRFP was generated by PCR amplification of monomeric RFP with rhomboid-1 (Rho1), a Golgi marker protein (Lee et al., 2001; Chen et al., 2006) and cloning into pUAST. Construct used for transfecting human CHO cells was pIRESneo-dZIP13-myc, constructed in pIRESneo (clontech) by fusing myc in frame to the C terminal of dZIP13 using the following primers: pIRESneo-dZIP13 F: 5′-CTAGTGATATC AGCCGAAAATGACCACGAACAG-3′, pIRESneo-dZIP13 R: 5′-CGGAATTCCTACAGGTCTTCTTCAGAGATCAGTTTCTGTTCGTGTTCGAATAGCATGGTCATC-3′. Construct used in E. coli assay was pET28a-dZIP13, which was generated by cloning dZIP13 into pET28a using the following primers: pET28a-dZIP13 F: 5′-ACG CATATG ACCACGAACAGCAGCTTCTTC-3′, pET28a-dZIP13 R: 5′-TAC GAATTC CTAGTGTTCGAATAGCATGGTCATC-3′, and then transfected into BL21 (DE3).
The intracellular iron transfer process is not well understood, and the identity of the iron transporter responsible for iron delivery to the secretory compartments remains elusive. In this study, we show Drosophila ZIP13 (Slc39a13), a presumed zinc importer, fulfills the iron effluxing role. Interfering with dZIP13 expression causes iron-rescuable iron absorption defect, simultaneous iron increase in the cytosol and decrease in the secretory compartments, failure of ferritin iron loading, and abnormal collagen secretion. dZIP13 expression in E. coli confers upon the host iron-dependent growth and iron resistance. Importantly, time-coursed transport assays using an iron isotope indicated a potent iron exporting activity of dZIP13. The identification of dZIP13 as an iron transporter suggests that the spondylocheiro dysplastic form of Ehlers-Danlos syndrome, in which hZIP13 is defective, is likely due to a failure of iron delivery to the secretory compartments. Our results also broaden our knowledge of the scope of defects from iron dyshomeostasis.
Iron is essential for life. Amongst its many important roles, iron is crucial for producing collagen—the protein that provides both strength and elasticity to bones, tendons, ligaments, and skin. Like many other proteins, collagens are produced inside the endoplasmic reticulum—an organelle inside the cell that is enclosed by a membrane that is similar to the plasma membrane that surrounds the cell itself.