Efficacy of neural stem/progenitor cell (NPC) therapies after cerebral ischaemia could be better evaluated by monitoring in vivo migration and distribution of cells post-engraftment in parallel with analysis of lesion volume and functional recovery. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is ideally placed to achieve this, but still poses several challenges. We show that combining the ferumoxide MRI contrast agent Endorem with protamine sulphate (FePro) improves iron oxide uptake in cells compared to Endorem alone and is non-toxic. Hence FePro complex is a better contrast agent than Endorem for monitoring NPCs. FePro complex-labelled NPCs proliferated and differentiated normally in vitro, and upon grafting into the brain 48 hours post-ischaemia they were detected in vivo by MRI. Imaging over four weeks showed the development of a confounding endogenous hypointense contrast evolution at later timepoints within the lesioned tissue. This was at least partly due to accumulation within the lesion of macrophages and endogenous iron. Neither significant NPC migration, assessed by MRI and histologically, nor a reduction in the ischaemic lesion volume was observed in NPC-grafted brains.  Crucially, while MRI provides reliable information on engrafted cell location early after an ischaemic insult, pathophysiological changes to ischaemic lesions can interfere with cellular imaging at later timepoints.
Stroke remains a common cause of mortality and disability worldwide, with few effective treatments available. Cerebral ischaemia, caused by the reduction of blood flow in a cerebral artery, is the most common type of stroke, accounting for 80% of strokes1. Cellular therapy is an emerging and promising avenue for treatment of cerebral ischaemia. Several experimental studies have demonstrated that treatment with neural stem cells after an ischaemic event improves neurological score and behavioural recovery, and can reduce infarct volume. These findings have led to a small number of clinical trials of cellular therapy in stroke patients, with modest effects on neurological outcome and motor skill recovery. It is clear that further optimisation of cell type and cell delivery, and a greater understanding of the behaviour of engrafted cells in vivo is required for improved therapeutic outcome.
Previous research has demonstrated that fetal telencephalic neural progenitor cells engrafted into the ischaemic brain are capable of migration towards the infarct, and of improving behavioural recovery. A small percentage of engrafted neural stem/progenitor cells (NPCs) have been shown to differentiate into neurons in the peri-infarct area and integrate into the neural network. Developmentally, NPCs give rise to the cortical neuron layers in the normal developing embryo, and may have the appropriate migratory capacity and neurogenic potential to give rise to neurons after engraftment into host injury tissue.
In vivo monitoring of engrafted cells is an important tool that could be developed to correlate cell behaviour and distribution with clinical outcome. Cellular imaging with MRI contrast agents can be used to monitor the distribution of transplanted cells in models of cerebral ischaemia. Hoehn et al. demonstrated that mouse embryonic stem (ES) cells could be labelled with an iron oxide-based agent19 and subsequently migrate into the infarcted area from the contralateral hemisphere. Cell migration and functional improvement has been observed in rat models of stroke after intracisternal injection of superparamagnetic iron oxide (SPIO)-labelled neurospheres20. Engrafted cells labelled with SPIO have been shown to survive and differentiate into neural lineages in the ischaemic striatum.
Further development of contrast agents with low toxicity, high labelling efficiency and retention is required for improved detectability and effective long-term cell tracking in vivo.
The ferumoxide Endorem is a dextran-coated superparamagnetic iron oxide agent that can form a complex with the polycationic protamine sulphate – the FePro complex. Previous studies have suggested that the FePro complex has little effect on cell viability and behaviour.
Therefore we wished to assess the effect of FePro on NPC behaviour, and establish whether labelling and in vivo imaging of NPCs could be enhanced by using this complex. We studied the effect of FePro labelling on NPC metabolism, proliferation and differentiation capacity. FePro-labelled NPCs were engrafted into the ipsilateral parenchyma at 48 hours post-ischaemia and monitored over 4 weeks using MRI. Assessment of NPC proliferation and differentiation capacity demonstrated no difference in the behaviour of FePro-labelled NPC compared to unlabelled NPC. In vivo, we observed the evolution of hypointense T2 contrast in the ischaemic striatum over several weeks in both control and FePro-NPC engrafted animals.

