The inability of targeted BRAF inhibitors to produce long-lasting improvement in the clinical outcome of melanoma highlights a need to identify additional approaches to inhibit melanoma growth. Recent studies have shown that activation of the Wnt/β-catenin pathway decreases tumor growth and cooperates with ERK/MAPK pathway inhibitors to promote apoptosis in melanoma. Therefore, the identification of Wnt/β-catenin regulators may advance the development of new approaches to treat this disease. In order to move towards this goal we performed a large scale small-interfering RNA (siRNA) screen for regulators of β-catenin activated reporter activity in human HT1080 fibrosarcoma cells. Integrating large scale siRNA screen data with phosphoproteomic data and bioinformatics enrichment identified a protein, FAM129B, as a potential regulator of Wnt/β-catenin signaling.  Functionally, we demonstrated that siRNA-mediated knockdown of FAM129B in A375 and A2058 melanoma cell lines inhibits WNT3A-mediated activation of a β-catenin-responsive luciferase reporter and inhibits expression of the endogenous Wnt/β-catenin target gene, AXIN2. We also demonstrate that FAM129B knockdown inhibits apoptosis in melanoma cells treated with WNT3A. These experiments support a role for FAM129B in linking Wnt/β-catenin signaling to apoptosis in melanoma.
The incidence of melanoma continues to rise across the U.S. at a rate faster than any other cancer. Malignant melanoma has a poor prognosis with a 5-year survival rate of only 15%3. The recently approved therapeutic, vemurafenib, extends median patient survival by 7 months. This major advance raises expectations that even greater rates of survival might be attainable with combination therapies.
Activation of the Wnt/β-catenin pathway decreases tumor growth and cooperates with ERK/MAPK pathway inhibitors to promote apoptosis in melanoma. Analysis of melanoma tumor samples show a positive correlation between nuclear β-catenin staining and decreased tumor depth, increased patient survival and increased time to metastasis. Moreover, treatment with WNT3A-containing conditioned media or stable overexpression of WNT3A in mouse B16 or human A375 melanoma cells reduces cell number in vitro. Allografts of mouse B16 or mouse xenografts of human A375 cells overexpressing WNT3A decrease tumor size compared to control. Recently, we found that activation of Wnt/β-catenin signaling concurrent with the inhibition of the ERK/MAPK pathway synergistically elevates apoptosis in a subset of BRAF- and NRAS-mutant cultured human melanoma cells. Given the interaction between Wnt/β-catenin signaling and pathways known to be critical for melanoma pathogenesis, the identification of Wnt/β-catenin regulators might prove to be informative in developing novel approaches to treat this disease.
In the present study, we identify novel regulators of Wnt/β-catenin signaling in melanoma by performing a large-scale small-interfering RNA (siRNA) screen of a Wnt/β-catenin responsive reporter in human HT1080 fibrosarcoma cells, and by identifying siRNA targets that are also regulated by ERK/MAPK signaling and that have been previously associated with melanoma. By integrating these three approaches, we identified FAM129B as a potential regulator of Wnt/β-catenin signaling. FAM129B is a 746 amino acid protein that contains an amino-terminal pleckstrin homology (PH) domain and a differentially phosphorylated carboxy-terminal region13. FAM129B is known to inhibit TNFα-dependent apoptosis in HeLa cells. FAM129B is expressed in melanoma and promotes tumor cell invasion into collagen matrices in an ERK/MAPK phosphorylation-dependent manner. In the present study we demonstrate that FAM129B promotes Wnt/β-catenin signal transduction in melanoma cells and that reducing levels of FAM129B with siRNA reduces the ability of WNT3A to increase apoptosis in melanoma cells.
