 Tubulins are universally conserved GTPases that polymerize in a head to tail fashion to form filaments. They have evolved properties that allow them to assemble into a wide variety of structures with various functions and dynamics. In eukaryotes, α/β-tubulin forms large, dynamically unstable microtubules (MTs), composed of 13 protofilaments (Downing and Nogales, 1998). MTs are the essential component of many cell biological processes; one of the most familiar and well studied is the mitotic spindle required for the faithful segregation of sister chromatids in all eukaryotic cells. To gain insight into the mechanism of phage centering by PhuZ, we investigated the properties of PhuZ filaments assembled in vitro and in vivo. First, we used total internal reflection (TIRF) microscopy to visualize dynamics of purified PhuZ (Figure 1A). In the presence of GTP and a crowding agent to minimize filament diffusion, 2.5 µM PhuZ (20% Cy3-labeled, 80% unlabeled) that was otherwise unattached to PEG-coated coverslips, formed short dynamic filaments that translocated across the coverslip (Video 1, Figure 1A). Many of these filaments displayed non-uniform intensity, and annealing and severing events were also observed (Video 2), implying that many of these structures consist of at least two PhuZ filaments. The apparent motion could be the result of either diffusion near the surface or treadmilling, that is, growth at one end and depolymerization at the other. This ambiguity could be resolved by using the naturally occurring intensity variations along each filament to allow growth and shrinkage rates at each end to be quantified (n = 40) independent of any overall filament motion. This revealed that the filaments treadmill in a coordinated manner (Figure 1A), with new filament growth at one end and depolymerization at the other. Depolymerization from these minus-ends occurred at a rate of 15 ± 5 µm/min (n = 40). The large amount of heterogeneity could be due to the presence of bundles and some events being catastrophic depolymerization events from a plus-end. Thus, like MTs and actin, PhuZ filaments must be polar, with one end growing faster than the other. In a manner reminiscent of MT catastrophe, filaments were also observed to occasionally fully depolymerize (Video 3).10.7554/eLife.03197.003Figure 1.TIRF microscopy reveals polarity and dynamic instability in PhuZ filaments.(A) Cy3 labeled PhuZ filaments exhibit treadmilling in the presence of GTP. Many filaments displayed non-uniform intensity (highlighted by arrows), which we used as stationary points to monitor growth and shrinkage of the ends independent of filament diffusion. With respect to the highlighted points, one end appears to grow while the other shrinks. (B-D) Polymerization of GTP-PhuZ filaments (green) off of GMPCPP stabilized PhuZ seeds (red) (see Methods). (B) Wide-field still image of PhuZ filaments growing unidirectionally off of GMPCPP stabilized seeds. (C) Montages of two representative PhuZ filaments undergoing dynamic instability. Periods of filament growth are followed by rapid disassembly back to the GMPCPP seed. (D) Kymographs of filaments from (C). Arrow indicates catastrophe event. Scale bars equal 2 μm.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.03197.00310.7554/eLife.03197.004Video 1.TIRF microscopy of 2.5 μM Cy3-PhuZ (20% Cy3) filaments reveals PhuZ filaments are dynamic and translocate around the field of view. Filaments treadmill and undergo catastrophic depolymerization. Images were aquired every 250 ms for 75 s. Scale bar equals 2 μm.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.03197.00410.7554/eLife.03197.005Video 2.Close up of Cy3-labelled PhuZ showing annealing, severing, and depolymerization events. Images were acquired every 500 ms for 100 s. Scale bar equals 2 μm.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.03197.00510.7554/eLife.03197.006Video 3.Close up of Cy-3 labelled PhuZ filaments demonstrating a full depolymerization event. Zoom in from Video 1. Scale bar equals 2 μm.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.03197.006 The ability of intrinsically polarized and dynamically unstable MTs to be anchored, stabilized, and regulated allows these filaments to be harnessed by the eukaryotic cell to perform key organizational tasks. It has been argued that the spatiotemporal organization of the cytoskeleton by organizing centers may be a defining characteristic of eukaryotes (Theriot, 2013). However, the prokaryotic cell also utilizes cytoskeletal proteins to organize internal space and efficiently execute essential life processes. Now we demonstrate that even entities often considered ‘non-living’, such as bacteriophage, can exploit the advantages of a well-defined cytoskeletal organization to faithfully propagate themselves. Wild-type and KCK-PhuZ were expressed and purified as previously reported (Kraemer et al., 2012). D190A-PhuZ was purified by an altered protocol to minimize polymerization. Cultures were lysed in a buffer containing 500 mM KCl, 2 mM EDTA, 10% glycerol, 15 mM thioglycerol, and 50 mM HEPES, pH 8 and cleared at 35k xg. 0.1 vol of DOWEX resin were then added to the clarified lysate to remove nucleotide. The sample was then spun at 38,000 RPM in a Ti45 rotor (Beckman Coulter, Pasadena, CA) to remove the resin and residual aggregates. D190A-PhuZ was then purified by Ni-affinity chromatography using an EDTA-resistant Ni-resin (Roche, Switzerland). The 6× His-tag was cleaved with thrombin protease and EDTA was dialyzed out, and the protein was subsequently purified by gel filtration (Superdex 200) in a buffer containing 250 mM KCl, 1 mM MgCl2, 10% glycerol, 15 mM thioglycerol, and 50 mM HEPES, pH 8. Prior to experiments, all constructs were spun at 80,000 RPM in a TLA100 rotor (Beckman) at 4°C for 20 min.
Dynamic instability, polarity, and spatiotemporal organization are hallmarks of the microtubule cytoskeleton that allow formation of complex structures such as the eukaryotic spindle. No similar structure has been identified in prokaryotes. The bacteriophage-encoded tubulin PhuZ is required to position DNA at mid-cell, without which infectivity is compromised. Here, we show that PhuZ filaments, like microtubules, stochastically switch from growing in a distinctly polar manner to catastrophic depolymerization (dynamic instability) both in vitro and in vivo. One end of each PhuZ filament is stably anchored near the cell pole to form a spindle-like array that orients the growing ends toward the phage nucleoid so as to position it near mid-cell. Our results demonstrate how a bacteriophage can harness the properties of a tubulin-like cytoskeleton for efficient propagation. This represents the first identification of a prokaryotic tubulin with the dynamic instability of microtubules and the ability to form a simplified bipolar spindle.
For a cell or virus to reproduce, it must duplicate its genome and separate the two copies. In plants and animals, this DNA is stored in the nucleus of each cell in the form of chromosomes, and a complex protein structure called the spindle apparatus is responsible for physically aligning and then separating the duplicated chromosomes.