 Myopathies due to mutations in RyR1 are inherited and currently incurable. Congenital myopathies are characterized by hypotonia and delay of motor development with weakness in skeletal muscles. In normal muscle, nuclei are located at the periphery of the myofibers and the mitochondria reside throughout the myofiber. Muscle biopsies of patients with myopathies and mutations in ryanodine receptor type 1 (RyR1) show centralized nuclei as well as disorganized areas in the center of the myofiber, called cores, that lack mitochondria and are devoid of metabolic activity, reflective of cellular damage. The most common RyR1-associated myopathy is central core disease (CCD) (Wu et al., 2006; Jungbluth, 2007). In addition, RyR1 mutations in muscle cause diseases such as multi-mini core disease (MMD), hypokalemic periodic paralysis, and malignant hyperthermia (MH), although the phenotype/genotype relationship is unclear (Fujii et al., 1991; Marchant et al., 2004; Treves et al., 2008; Wilmshurst et al., 2010). Through a forward genetic screen in mice, we identified a mutation in which heterozygous mutant mice display muscle weakness. Sequencing identified an E4242G change in exon 93 of Ryr1 (Figure 1A) outside of the channel region of RyR1. This allele is named RyR1m1Nisw, but here we will refer to it as Ryr1AG. Gene identification was confirmed by a lack of complementation in a genetic cross between RyR1AG and RyR1tm1TAlle allele (see ‘Materials and methods’). RyR1 mutations in humans are associated with several congenital myopathies including CCD, multi-mini core disease, hypokalemic periodic paralysis, and malignant hyperthermia (MH) (Fujii et al., 1991; Marchant et al., 2004; Jungbluth, 2007; Treves et al., 2008; Wilmshurst et al., 2010). 1-month, 2-month, and 1-year old Ryr1AG/+ mice showed a significant decrease in grip strength and considerable deficits on a wire hanging task compared to Ryr1+/+ mice (Figure 1B,C). Malignant hyperthermia test was performed by placing Ryr1+/+ and Ryr1AG/+ mice in a 41°C humidified incubator for 30 min. There was no sign of muscle rigidity or spasticity or seizure activity for any of the animals. To test for sensitivity to halogenated anesthetics, anesthetic isoflurane was administered to Ryr1AG/+ mice at ∼5.5 × 10−5 ml/cm3 for a maximum of 30 min exposure. Ryr1AG/+ mice showed no MH response after exposure to isoflurane. The rectal temperature in Ryr1AG/+ mice after isoflurane exposure was similar to wild-type littermates [Ryr1AG/+ was 35.6 ± 0.9°C at 2 months (n = 5) and 35.9 ± 0.6°C at 6 months (n = 5) compared with Ryr1+/+ 35.4 ± 0.8°C and 35.8 ± 0.7°C at 2 and 6 months respectively (n = 5 for both)]. Thus, heterozygous mutant mice show muscle weakness, the clinical definition of a myopathy.10.7554/eLife.02923.003Figure 1.ENU-induced Ryr1AG mutation mimics clinical and pathological features of CCD in heterozygous mice.(A) Missense mutation in exon 93 of Ryr1 changes A to G, resulting in substitution of glutamic acid with glycine (E4242G). (B) Average grip strength assayed using vertical digital push-pull strain gauge on Ryr1+/+ and Ryr1AG/+ mice at different ages raised on control 0.6% potassium diet. (C) In vivo hanging task determination of upper-body strength of Ryr1+/+ and Ryr1AG/+ mice at different ages (B, C, 10 trials/mouse, n = 5 per set). (D, E) H&E staining indicate central nuclei (arrows) in Ryr1AG/+ (E) but not Ryr1+/+ (D) vastus lateralis muscle from 1-year old mice raised on control 0.6% potassium diet. (F, G) NADH-TR staining indicates cores (white arrows) in 1-year old vastus lateralis of RyR1AG/+ but not Ryr1+/+. (H, I) Cytochrome oxidase (COX) staining denotes a decrease in mitochondrial function (white arrows) in vastus lateralis muscle of Ryr1AG/+ (I) compared to Ryr1+/+ (H). Scale bar = 50 μm. (J-L) Transmission electron microscopy of 2-month old Ryr1AG/+ soleus muscle. (J, K) Regions of Z line streaming and associated sarcoplasmic disruption and cores (white arrows) of myofibrils. (L) Enlarged T-tubules are present in type I fibers (scale bars: J = 1 μm; K = 2 μm; L = 0.2 μm ).DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.02923.003 In this study, we present a myopathic mouse model with core-like pathology that illuminates mechanisms underlying muscle weakness and mitochondria dysfunction. First, we identified a mutation in RyR1 that induces a myopathy with ultrastructural hallmarks of cores similar to the Ryr1I4895T/+ mutant mouse, a known mouse model of CCD (Boncompagni et al., 2009, 2010). Second, we used this myopathic mouse model to identify a novel link between decreased internal calcium (Figure 2), decreased mitochondrial ATP production (Figure 3), and altered potassium homeostasis (Figure 4), mechanisms that are important in controlling excitability in muscle. Third, we provide evidence that KATP channels are elevated in the membrane and overactive, leading to increased potassium efflux in this myopathic mouse model, which could have direct effects on membrane excitability. Fourth, we provide clinically relevant findings that suggest a potassium-enriched diet, perhaps in combination with the sulfonylurea class of anti-diabetic drugs, which are potential therapies for myopathies with defects in potassium homeostasis. Using multiple assays and different muscles with different fiber type compositions, our data are consistent and show muscle weakness, pathological changes, and gene expression changes. The consistency of our data between muscle types further strengthens our hypotheses and conclusions. It should be noted that malignant hyperthermia, a disease associated with RyR1 mutations, is sensitive to potassium chloride (Moulds and Denborough, 1974), and therefore a testing method in patients or biopsy samples need to be initiated prior to potassium supplementation. Importantly, our work identifies potential diagnostic biomarkers of disease in patients with CCD and potentially non-RyR1 myopathies, which could be utilized to identify patients who may be candidates for potassium modulation-based therapies. ENU mutagenesis was performed as described (Kasarskis et al., 1998) on males of C57BL/6J background and then outcrossed onto 129S1/Svlmj background to score G3 embryos at embryonic day 18.5 for recessive mutations that affect embryonic locomotion. The Ryr1m1Nisw allele showed muscle weakness when heterozygous (described here) and a non-motile embryonic phenotype when homozygous (unpublished results). The gene mutation was mapped using data from homozygous mutants, starting with a panel of 96 MIT and SKI SSLP markers, which mapped the Line1-4 mutation to the proximal third of chromosome 7. The genetic region containing the mutation was narrowed to 3 Mb by the use of additional MIT SSLP markers on chromosome 7 and further meiotic mapping which followed linkage between the phenotype and C57BL/6J markers. As Ryr1 was a strong candidate gene in the critical interval, a complementation cross was performed between Ryr1AG (Ryr1m1Nisw) and Ryr1 tm1TAlle (dyspedic null allele generated by Richard Allen, [Buck et al., 1997]). These alleles did not complement as E18.5 trans-heterozygotes showed a similar non-motile phenotype as homozygotes of either allele. To identify the mutation in Line1-4, genomic DNA in overlapping segments of the Ryr1 gene was amplified by PCR from phenotypic E18.5 embryos and compared with control E18.5 C57Bl/6J DNA. Subsequently, embryos were genotyped as follows: tissue was placed in tail lysis buffer (100 mM Tris-Cl, pH 8.0, 5 mM EDTA, 0.2% SDS, 200 mM NaCl) overnight. DNA was amplified using Taqman Gold (Applied Biosystems) with primer set to RyR1 mutation (forward primer: GTGGAGTGTGGTGCTGTATATC forward and CCGTCACTGTCACCTTCTTG reverse primers). PCR amplification was performed for 35 cycles at 55°C. PCR product was sent to Barbara Davis Center Molecular Biology Service Center at the University of Colorado Denver for sequencing. For non-sequencing genotyping, the MIT SSLP markers, D7MIT114 and D7MIT267, were amplified to examine linkage between phenotypic background (C57BL/6J) and control background (129/SvJ). Transcript accession for RyR1 was NM_0091009 and the ENU-induced change was A12864G (protein NP_033135, resulting in E4242G). All of the data presented here were obtained after outcrossing >8 generations onto 129S1/Svlmj background.
Myopathies decrease muscle functionality. Mutations in ryanodine receptor 1 (RyR1) are often associated with myopathies with microscopic core-like structures in the muscle fiber. In this study, we identify a mouse RyR1 model in which heterozygous animals display clinical and pathological hallmarks of myopathy with core-like structures. The RyR1 mutation decreases sensitivity to activated calcium release and myoplasmic calcium levels, subsequently affecting mitochondrial calcium and ATP production. Mutant muscle shows a persistent potassium leak and disrupted expression of regulators of potassium homeostasis. Inhibition of KATP channels or increasing interstitial potassium by diet or FDA-approved drugs can reverse the muscle weakness, fatigue-like physiology and pathology. We identify regulators of potassium homeostasis as biomarkers of disease that may reveal therapeutic targets in human patients with myopathy of central core disease (CCD). Altogether, our results suggest that amelioration of potassium leaks through potassium homeostasis mechanisms may minimize muscle damage of myopathies due to certain RyR1 mutations.
Skeletal muscle covers our skeleton and allows us to move around. One disorder that leads to weakness in skeletal muscle—known as central core disease—can leave affected infants ‘floppy’ and delay the development of motor skills such as sitting, crawling, and walking. While no cure or treatment currently exists for the disease, researchers have found that most cases are connected to a mutation in the gene that makes a protein called ryanodine receptor type 1 (RyR1).