 Cells remodel the protein composition of the plasma membrane, such as receptors, transporters or channels, in response to external cues. Endocytosis is a major component of this adaptation. The conjugation of ubiquitin to membrane proteins (‘cargoes’) acts as a major determinant of their intracellular sorting in the endocytic pathway. Ubiquitin can notably act as a signal to promote cargo endocytosis from the plasma membrane (reviewed in Dupré et al., 2004). This is particularly true in yeast, and studies have shown the critical involvement of Rsp5, a conserved ubiquitin ligase of the Nedd4 family, in cargo ubiquitylation at the plasma membrane upon triggering endocytosis (reviewed in MacGurn et al., 2012). As a first approach to identify the place of action of Rod1 in endocytosis, we set out to precisely document the endocytosis defect displayed by the rod1Δ mutant. For this purpose, we monitored transporter trafficking in wild type (WT) and rod1Δ cells using two different cargoes, namely the glycerol/proton symporter Stl1, and the monocarboxylate transporter Jen1. Stl1 is expressed when cells are grown in glycerol/lactate medium, and endocytosed in response to glucose (Ferreira et al., 2005). The glucose-induced endocytosis and degradation of Stl1 required Rod1, establishing Stl1 as a new Rod1-regulated cargo (Figure 1A,B), in addition to the previously described hexose transporter Hxt6 (Nikko and Pelham, 2009) and Jen1 (Becuwe et al., 2012b). We then performed time-lapse microscopy using a microfluidics device to precisely monitor Stl1-GFP localization immediately after glucose addition in WT and rod1Δ cells. Both strains were co-injected into the microfluidics chamber and observed simultaneously. Their identification was made possible by a pre-staining of the rod1Δ cells with the vital dye CMAC. Whereas Stl1-GFP was internalized within 5 min after glucose addition in WT cells, it remained stably associated to the plasma membrane in the rod1Δ mutant and was not internalized even 30 min after glucose treatment (Figure 1C, Video 1). This is in agreement with a canonical role of Rod1 in transporter internalization at the plasma membrane.10.7554/eLife.03307.003Figure 1.Dual function of Rod1 in transporter internalization and post-endocytic sorting.(A) Rod1 is required for the glucose-induced endocytosis of Stl1, the glycerol/proton symporter, from the plasma membrane to the vacuole. WT (ySL1146) and rod1Δ (ySL1153) cells were grown in lactate/glycerol medium to induce Stl1-GFP expression and targeting to the plasma membrane. Cells were treated with glucose for the indicated times and imaged for Stl1-GFP localization. Scale bar = 2.5 µm. (B) Stl1-GFP degradation in response to glucose requires Rod1. WT (ySL1146) and rod1Δ (ySL1153) cells expressing Stl1-GFP were grown as in A. Crude extracts were prepared at the indicated times and were immunoblotted with anti-GFP antibodies. (C) Rod1 is required for Stl1 internalization in response to glucose. WT (ySL1146) and rod1Δ (ySL1153) cells were grown in lactate/glycerol medium to induce Stl1-GFP expression and targeting to the plasma membrane. rod1Δ cells were then labeled with CMAC and were co-injected with WT cells into the microfluidics device in lactate/glycerol medium, before glucose was added. Images taken at 10 and 20 min after glucose addition are shown. Scale bar = 2.5 µm. See also Video 1. (D) Jen1-GFP is internalized upon glucose treatment even in the absence of Rod1. Lactate-grown WT (ySL1150) and rod1Δ (ySL743) cells expressing Jen1-GFP were injected into a microfluidics device in lactate medium. Cells were imaged over time after glucose addition. Scale bar = 2.5 µm. (E) The appearance of Jen1-GFP-positive puncta in the rod1Δ mutant is inhibited by latrunculin A (LatA). Left panel, rod1Δ (ySL743) cells expressing Jen1-GFP were grown on lactate medium and injected into the microfluidics device in lactate medium, before glucose was added. Right panel, glucose and LatA were simultaneously added. After 5 min, LatA was removed and cells were fueled only with glucose medium. Scale bar = 2.5 µm. (F) rod1Δ cells display a kinetic delay in Jen1 internalization. Top, WT (ySL1150) and rod1Δ (ySL743) cells expressing Jen1-GFP were grown on lactate medium. The rod1Δ cells were then labeled with CMAC and were co-injected with WT cells into the microfluidics device in lactate medium, before glucose was added. Images taken at 5 and 13 min after glucose addition are shown. Bottom, images representative of WT and rod1Δ cells are shown at various times and are shown in false colors to visualize Jen1 fluorescence intensity. Arrowheads indicate strongly fluorescent vesicles, presumably late endosomes, which do not appear in the rod1Δ mutant. Scale bar = 2.5 µm. See also Video 3. (G) Quantification of the experiment shown in F. The mean number (plus-minusSEM) of vesicles in a focal plane for each strain (30 cells/strain, n = 3) was plotted as a function of time. (H) Graphical representation of the phenotype observed in rod1Δ cells. A fraction of Jen1 is internalized but recycles to the cell membrane.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.03307.00310.7554/eLife.03307.004Video 1.Rod1 is required for the glucose-induced internalization of the glycerol/proton symporter Stl1.WT and rod1Δ (CMAC-positive) cells expressing Stl1-GFP were grown in lactate/glycerol medium and simultaneously observed for 20 min after glucose addition. See also Figure 1C.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.03307.004 Arrestin-related proteins have emerged as key players in the regulation of transporter endocytosis and degradation by nutrient signaling pathways in yeast and mammalian cells (O'Donnell, 2012; Wu et al., 2013). In the present study, the use of microfluidics-assisted live cell imaging allowed us to follow, for the first time, the dynamics of cargo trafficking in response to variations in the presence of the endocytic stimulus, as well as the localization of the ART protein Rod1 in these conditions. This revealed a dual function of the ART protein Rod1 in the control of transporter endocytosis and degradation by glucose availability (Figure 8, left and middle panel). First, Rod1 exerts a function at the plasma membrane, as it is essential for the endocytosis of the glycerol/proton symporter Stl1, and required for the efficient internalization of Jen1 upon glucose treatment (Figure 1). Second, Rod1 also controls transporter sorting after endocytosis, a step which takes place at the trans-Golgi network (Figure 8, middle panel). Indeed, Jen1 localizes to the TGN after endocytosis, and both (i) the endosome-to-Golgi retrograde pathway and (ii) the Gga1/2-dependent, Golgi-to-vacuole pathway are required for the vacuolar delivery of Jen1, indicating a critical role for the TGN in transporter degradation (Figure 4). Moreover, we showed that the endocytosis of the unrelated amino acid transporter, Dip5, in response to its substrate also involves a step at the TGN as well as the GGA proteins. These results shed a new light on previous studies showing the involvement of GGA proteins in the endocytic trafficking of Gap1, the general amino-acid permease (Scott et al., 2004; Lauwers et al., 2009), which could be explained by a similar control of Gap1 fate at the TGN. The yeast TGN therefore appears as a critical organelle for the post-endocytic sorting of transporters. This new level of regulation provides an opportunity to re-evaluate, after internalization, the commitment of transporters to the degradation pathway. Indeed, upon glucose removal, we show that internalized Jen1 recycles to the cell surface after it has reached the TGN (Figure 6; Figure 8, right panel).10.7554/eLife.03307.032Figure 8.Working model for the dual function of Rod1 in the regulation of transporter endocytosis and recycling.Left, in lactate medium, Jen1 is synthesized and targeted to the plasma membrane. Although Rod1 interacts with Rsp5 (Becuwe et al., 2012b), it is inactive (phosphorylated) and cytosolic. Middle, In the presence of glucose, Rod1 is activated by a protein phosphatase 1 (PP1)-dependent dephosphorylation and its subsequent Rsp5-mediated ubiquitylation (Becuwe et al., 2012b). Rod1 promotes transporter internalization at the plasma membrane (1), but also localizes to the TGN (2). There, Rod1 controls the fate of internalized transporters that have been retrograde-trafficked by a VFT- and Ypt6-dependent pathway, and also that of transporters coming from the secretory pathway. Transporter sorting from the TGN to the vacuole requires Rod1 and the clathrin adaptors Gga1 or Gga2 (GGAs). Right, Upon glucose removal, shortly after endocytosis is initiated, Rod1 is rephosphorylated (likely by the kinase Snf1) (Becuwe et al., 2012b), leading to Rod1 dissociation from the TGN and Jen1 recycling to the cell membrane.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.03307.032 Strains are listed and detailed in Supplementary file 1. All strains are derivatives of the BY4741/2 strains, except for the gga1Δ GGA2-HA and gga1Δ gga2Δ strains, which were kindly provided by Prof. R Piper, University of Iowa, Iowa City, USA (Scott et al., 2004) and the gga1Δgga2Δ and gga1Δgga2Δ ypt6Δ strains (23344c background) that were kindly provided by Prof. B André, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Belgium (Lauwers et al., 2009). The 9-arrestin mutant was kindly provided by Dr H Pelham (MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Cambridge, UK) (Nikko and Pelham, 2009). Yeast was transformed by standard lithium acetate/polyethylene glycol procedure. Cells were grown in yeast extract/peptone/glucose (YPD) rich medium, or in synthetic complete (SC) medium containing 2% (wt/vol) Glc, or 0.5% (vol/vol) Na-lactate (pH 5.0) (Sigma-Aldrich, Lyon, France). For lactate inductions, cells were grown overnight in SC-Glc, harvested in early exponential phase (A600 = 0.3), resuspended in the same volume of SC-lactate and grown for 4 hr (A600 = 0.5), before the addition of glucose (2% wt/vol, final concentration). For the observation of Stl1-GFP, cells were grown for 2 hr in lactate medium, and glycerol was then added (3% vol/vol) for 2 hr to induce Stl1-GFP expression and targeting to the plasma membrane. For galactose induction, cells were precultured in SC-Glc medium, and grown overnight to early exponential phase (A600 = 0.3) in SC medium containing 2% raffinose (wt/vol) and 0.02% Glc (wt/vol) to initiate growth. Galactose was then added at a final concentration of 2% (wt/vol) and cells were grown for the indicated times. Chase/endocytosis was started by adding glucose to a final concentration of 2% (wt/vol) and incubating for the indicated times. Latrunculin A (Sigma) was used a final concentration of 0.2 mM.
After endocytosis, membrane proteins can recycle to the cell membrane or be degraded in lysosomes. Cargo ubiquitylation favors their lysosomal targeting and can be regulated by external signals, but the mechanism is ill-defined. Here, we studied the post-endocytic trafficking of Jen1, a yeast monocarboxylate transporter, using microfluidics-assisted live-cell imaging. We show that the ubiquitin ligase Rsp5 and the glucose-regulated arrestin-related trafficking adaptors (ART) protein Rod1, involved in the glucose-induced internalization of Jen1, are also required for the post-endocytic sorting of Jen1 to the yeast lysosome. This new step takes place at the trans-Golgi network (TGN), where Rod1 localizes dynamically upon triggering endocytosis. Indeed, transporter trafficking to the TGN after internalization is required for their degradation. Glucose removal promotes Rod1 relocalization to the cytosol and Jen1 deubiquitylation, allowing transporter recycling when the signal is only transient. Therefore, nutrient availability regulates transporter fate through the localization of the ART/Rsp5 ubiquitylation complex at the TGN.
The plasma membrane that surrounds cells contains many different proteins that perform tasks such as detecting signals sent to the cell, and transporting molecules into or out of the cell. To adapt to changing conditions, cells remodel their membrane to change how much of each type of protein is present. A process called endocytosis—where part of the plasma membrane and the proteins it contains buds off into the cell—plays an important role in this remodeling.