 Collagens are the most abundant secretory proteins, comprising 25-30% of the human body dry weight (Pataridis et al., 2008). They are required for cell attachment, tissue organization and remodeling, and for the differentiation of chondrocytes to produce mineralized bones (Gelse et al., 2003; Wilson et al., 2011). There are at least 28 different kinds of collagens, composed of homo or hetero trimers of polypeptide chains coiled around each other to form a triple helix (Shoulders and Raines, 2009). These unbendable triple helices, which can be up to 450 nm long, as in the case of Collagen VII, are too big to fit into the conventional transport carriers of the secretory pathway that have been identified thus far (Malhotra and Erlmann, 2011). How are these bulky proteins exported from the ER? To search for proteins that interact with cytoplasmically oriented portions of TANGO1, we expressed a Myc-His tagged version of a truncated form of TANGO1 (TANGO1ct) that lacks the luminal domain in HeLa cells. After crosslinking with membrane permeable DSP and lysis, proteins were recovered on a Nickel agarose column and analyzed by mass spectrometry. Of interest was the finding of SLY1 in the pool of proteins cross-linked to TANGO1. Is the export of bulky collagens from the ER mediated by the standard COPII machinery? How is the size of the COPII coats regulated to generate a mega carrier for the export of collagens that can be up to 450 nm of rigid unbendable structures? How are the secretory collagens connected with the cytoplasmic COPII machinery? Are all the bulky collagens exported by a common secretory pathway? Our new data show that knockdown of SAR1 A and B inhibits the export of PC VII from the ER. This, combined with the data on the involvement of SEC31 ubiquitination for the export of PC I from the ER (Jin et al., 2012) and Sedlin, a component of the TRAPP II complex that affects the GTPase activity of SAR1 and promotes PC I and II export (Venditti et al., 2012), strongly indicates that SAR1 dependent recruitment of COPII components is required for general collagen export from the ER. TANGO1 constructs were as described previously (Saito et al., 2009).
TANGO1 binds and exports Procollagen VII from the endoplasmic reticulum (ER). In this study, we report a connection between the cytoplasmic domain of TANGO1 and SLY1, a protein that is required for membrane fusion. Knockdown of SLY1 by siRNA arrested Procollagen VII in the ER without affecting the recruitment of COPII components, general protein secretion, and retrograde transport of the KDEL-containing protein BIP, and ERGIC53. SLY1 is known to interact with the ER-specific SNARE proteins Syntaxin 17 and 18, however only Syntaxin 18 was required for Procollagen VII export. Neither SLY1 nor Syntaxin 18 was required for the export of the equally bulky Procollagen I from the ER. Altogether, these findings reveal the sorting of bulky collagen family members by TANGO1 at the ER and highlight the existence of different export pathways for secretory cargoes one of which is mediated by the specific SNARE complex containing SLY1 and Syntaxin 18.
Collagens are long proteins that join individual cells together to build tissues and organs. They also provide strength and elasticity to bones, tendons, and blood vessels. Like many other proteins, collagens are produced inside cells: they are folded in a compartment called the endoplasmic reticulum, and then packaged and transported to another compartment called the Golgi. Collagens are then directed from the Golgi to their final destination, which is typically the outside of the cell.