 Mitochondria have emerged as critical regulators of apoptotic and necrotic cell death, with distinct molecular effectors underlying each process (Tait and Green, 2010). Apoptosis is both an ATP- and caspase-dependent event characterized by chromatin condensation, cell shrinkage, and plasma membrane blebbing (Danial and Korsmeyer, 2004). Necrosis, however, is an ATP-independent event characterized by organelle swelling and early plasma membrane rupture (Danial and Korsmeyer, 2004). One key difference between apoptosis and necrosis is the type of events that occur in the mitochondria and the distinct pores that are formed. During apoptosis, the mitochondrial outer membrane is permeabilized through the action of the Bcl-2 family members Bax/Bak that generate large pores that allow for the release of cytochrome c and the subsequent activation of the caspase cascade. In contrast, during forms of cellular necrosis, one key regulated event is the opening of the mitochondrial permeability transition pore (MPTP), a protein complex that was proposed to span the inner and outer mitochondrial membranes in facilitating loss of the inner membrane potential, swelling, and eventual rupture of the organelle (Halestrap, 2009; Tait and Green, 2010). While the identity of the outer and inner membrane components of the MPTP remains elusive, cyclophilin D (CypD), a peptidylprolyl isomerase located in the mitochondrial matrix, is known to bind and regulate the inner membrane complex. Indeed, deletion of the gene encoding CypD renders mitochondria resistant to Ca2+ overload-induced swelling and the heart and brain partially resistant to cell death due to ischemic injury (Baines et al., 2005; Nakagawa et al., 2005; Schinzel et al., 2005). We first evaluated the ability of wild type (Wt) and Bax/Bak1-deficient (Bak1 gene encodes Bak protein) mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) to die by apoptosis or mitochondrial-dependent necrosis. As previously reported, Bax/Bak1 double-knockout (DKO) MEFs were highly resistant to cell death by the apoptotic inducer staurosporine (Wei et al., 2001), while Wt MEFs showed high levels of killing (Figure 1A). However, DKO MEFs were also resistant to H2O2, ionomycin, and DNA alkylation with methyl methanesulfonate (MMS) that appeared to induce a necrotic phenotype (Figure 1B-D). Indeed, electron microscopy verified that staurosporine-treated Wt cells, but not DKO cells, exhibited hallmarks of apoptosis including nuclear condensation with maintenance of plasma membrane integrity, while ionomycin induced a purely necrotic phenotype that showed rupture of the plasma membrane and dispersion of the nucleus, which was not seen in DKO cells (Figure 1E). By comparison, analysis of apoptotic cell death with annexin V (phosphatidylserine externalization in the plasma membrane) and necrotic death with propidium iodide (PI, plasma membrane opening/rupture) staining in cultured MEFs showed an apoptotic profile with staurosporine treatment, while ionomycin induced a necrotic phenotype; H2O2 had an intermediate profile of both forms (Figure 1—figure supplement 1A-D). Apoptosis leads to annexin V staining prior to PI staining, while necrosis causes simultaneous annexin V and PI staining. Molecular markers also confirmed a uniform apoptotic profile in Wt MEFs treated with staurosporine, such that caspase cleavage was observed and cell death was inhibited with z-Vad (pan-caspase inhibitor) but not by disabling the MPTP in MEFs from Ppif (CypD)-null mice (Figure 1—figure supplement 1E-H). By comparison, ionomycin-induced cell death in Wt MEFs did not appreciably involve caspase activation nor was it affected by caspase inhibition, while inhibiting MPTP function by deletion of the Ppif gene-reduced cell death, suggesting mitochondrial-dependent necrosis (Figure 1—figure supplement 1E-H). Using these conditions, DKO MEFs were completely refractory to H2O2- and ionomycin-induced necrosis as assessed with annexin V and PI labeling (Figure 1F,G; compare with Figure 1—figure supplement 1C,D), but all deaths were restored in DKO MEFs containing a stably integrated Bax or Bak viral-based expression cassette, or acutely by infection with a recombinant Bax encoding adenovirus, collectively indicating that there is not an unrelated defect in the DKO MEFs (Figure 1H,I). Reconstitution with Bax and Bak produced an equal or slightly lower level of protein compared with endogenous protein content in Wt cells (data not shown).10.7554/eLife.00772.003Figure 1.Bax/Bak1 DKO MEFs are resistant to a necrotic-like cell death.(A)-(C) MultiTox-Fluor multiplex cytotoxicity assay, which measures membrane (mem) integrity loss induced death, for different time points in cultures of Wt and Bax/Bak1 DKO MEFs treated with staurosporine (St), H2O2, ionomycin (Iono) for different time points. (D) Propidium iodide (PI) inclusion to assess membrane integrity following methyl methanesulfonate (MMS) for different time points. (E) Transmission electron microscopy of Wt and DKO MEFs treated with the indicated agents for 10 hr (St, 200 nM) or 20 hr (Iono, 20 μM). Magnification is ×10,000 for all panels. (F) and (G) FACS quantitation of annexin V and PI staining of DKO MEFs treated with H2O2 (800 μM) or ionomycin (20 μM) for the indicated time points. Apoptotic and necrotic killing was almost nonexistent in DKO MEFs compared with Wt MEFs shown in Figure 1—figure supplement 1. (H) PI inclusion rates for cell death assessment in DKO MEFs or DKO MEFs expressing a stable cDNA for Bax or Bak with the indicated death inducing agents for 20 hr. #p<0.05 vs DKO alone. (I) PI inclusion rates for cell death assessment in DKO MEFs and DKO MEFs infected with a Bax expression adenovirus following stimulation with the indicated death-inducing agents for 12 (St) or 24 hr (H2O2, Iono). #p<0.05 vs DKO alone. (J) and (K) Oxygen consumption rates (OCR) in cultures of Wt (J) or DKO (K) MEFs treated with St (200 nM) or Iono (20 μM) for the indicated time points. Rates are expressed as pmol/min per 1000 cells in a well of a 24-well dish. All assays were performed in duplicate and averaged from three independent experiments. *p<0.05 vs 0 time point; #p<0.05 vs no treatment.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.00772.00310.7554/eLife.00772.004Figure 1—figure supplement 1.Conditions whereby staurosporine induces only apoptosis while ionomycin induces necrosis in cultured Wt MEFs.(A). Immunocytochemistry for propidium iodide (PI, red), annexin V (green), or a merged channel with Hoechst (blue for nuclei) in Wt MEFs treated with staurosporine (St) for 6 hr, H2O2 for 12 hr, or ionomycin (Iono) for 20 hr (B)-(D) FACS analysis of Wt MEFs treated with St (200 nM), H2O2 (800 μM), or Iono (20 μM) for the indicated times, after which cultures were lifted from the plates and sorted for annexin V (AnxV) or annexin V with PI. Annexin V only cells are apoptotic, whereas annexin V with PI labeled cells are necrotic. *p<0.05 vs PI + AnxV in (B) or vs AnxV in (D). Results were averaged from three independent experiments. (E) Western blot quantitation for cleaved caspase 3 from Wt MEFs treated with the agents shown under conditions shown in (A). Cleaved caspase 3 is a reflection of apoptosis induction, which is highly correlated with St (200 nM, 8 hr) treatment but not Iono (20 μM, 12 hr) or H2O2 (800 μM, 12 hr). (F) Cell death assay for PI positivity in Wt MEFs in the presence of the indicated pro-death agents for the times shown in (A) with or without caspase inhibition with z-Vad. Caspase inhibition only reduced apoptotic death induced by St. *p<0.05 vs none (n = 3 experiments). St (200 nM, 12 hr), Iono (20 μM, 16 hr), and H2O2 (800 μM, 12 hr). (G) Cell death assay for PI positivity in Wt and Ppif null MEFs with the indicated pro-death agents. Ppif null MEFs reduced cell death with H2O2 or ionomycin necrotic stimulation but not with the apoptotic stimuli staurosporine (St). *p<0.0001 vs Wt control, n = 3 independent experiments. St (200 nM, 24 hr), Iono (20 μM, 24 hr), H2O2 (800 μM, 24 hr). (H) Western blot showing cyclophilin D and GAPDH (control) protein levels from Wt and Ppif knockout MEFs.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.00772.00410.7554/eLife.00772.005Figure 1—figure supplement 2.Bax/Bax1 null MEFs (DKO) have normal mitochondrial protein content except for a slight upregulation of Bim and BNip3.Western blotting of protein extracts fractionated as cytosol or purified mitochondria for the indicated proteins. Metabolic proteins were unchanged in Bax/Bak1 null MEFs vs Wt MEFs, as were cyclophilin D (CypD) and VDAC1. Other Bcl-2 family members were unchanged apart from a slight increase in Bim and Bnip3. Bax and Bak protein was missing. β-tubulin shows successful fractionation of just the cytosol.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.00772.00510.7554/eLife.00772.006Figure 1—figure supplement 3.Bax/Bak1-deficient mitochondria remain coupled for ATP generation after ionomycin treatment.(A) and (B) Oxygen consumption rates (OCR) in 24-well dish cultures of Wt (A) or DKO (B) MEFs treated with St (200 nM) or Iono (20 μM) for 12 hr and then sequentially treated with 2 μM oligomycin (oligo), 3 μM FCCP or 4 μM Antimycin A (ANT A). Rates are expressed as pmoles/min per 1000 cells. All assays were performed in duplicate and averaged from three independent experiments.DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.7554/eLife.00772.006 It is intriguing that loss of Bax/Bak protein dramatically desensitizes the mitochondrial permeability pore, in a manner similar to CsA. Over a decade ago, several reports suggested that Bax and/or Bak directly interacted with presumed components of the MPTP, the adenine nucleotide translocator (ANT) in the inner membrane and the VDAC in the outer membrane (Marzo et al., 1998; Narita et al., 1998; Shimizu et al., 1999). However, while the mitochondrial swelling/permeability pore data reported in these earlier manuscripts are still valid, the conclusion that Bax/Bak function merely to regulate the MPTP by binding VDAC or ANT is not consistent with the data from Slc25a4/Slc25a5 (ANT1/2 protein) and Vdac1/2/3 gene-deleted mice, which showed that neither protein is directly required for MPTP formation (Kokoszka et al., 2004; Baines et al., 2007). Wt and Bax and Bak1 DKO SV40 immortalized MEFs, and all variations were cultured in IMDM medium supplemented with 10% bovine growth serum, antibiotics, and nonessential amino acids. DKO MEFs expressing Wt and mutant Bax-GFP were previously described (Wei et al., 2001; Hoppins et al., 2011). DKO MEFs with reconstituted Bax and Bak were also previously described (Kim et al., 2009). DKO MEFs were infected with a binary adenovirus expressing Bax (Ad-Bax) was previously described and obtained from Dr Bingliang Fang (Kagawa et al., 2000). DKO MEFs were also infected with an adenovirus expressing β-galactosidase (Adβgal, control) or sarco/endoplasmic reticulum Ca2+-ATPase (AdSerca1) (Vector BioLabs, Philadelphia, PA). Ppif null MEFs were described previously (Baines et al., 2005), although for the current experiments, the cells were subjected to SV40-mediated immortalization. At 80% confluence, MEFs were treated with 200 nM staurosporine for 2-24 hr, 20 μM ionomycin for 4-24 hr, 750-800 μM H2O2 for 2-24 hr, 750 μM MMS for 2-24 hr, or 60-90 ng TNFα and 40 μM caspase inhibitor z-Vad-FMK (z-Vad; Promega, Madison, WI) for 24 hr (in some experiments, cells were pretreated with 40 μM z-Vad, 20 μM ABT-737, or 10 μM Gossypol). Cell death and viability was determined by PI uptake and annexin V (AV) positivity (BioVision, Milpitas, CA). Briefly, cells were trypsinized and washed twice and incubated with AV and PI for 10 min. The cells were then quantified for PI and AV positivity at 10,000 counts per sample by using a Cell Lab Quanta SC flow cytometer (Beckman Coulter, Indianapolis, IN). In some experiments, only PI was used and AV was replaced with PBS. Cell death and viability were also measured using the MultiTox-Fluor Multiplex Cytotoxicity Assay (Promega). Briefly, cells were cultured in 96-well plates and treated for given times and dosages, after which they were incubated with 2× MultiTox-Fluor Multiplex Cytotoxicity Assay reagent for 30 min at 37°C. The assay quantifies dead/live ratios by measuring membrane rupturing or opening, such as during necrosis or apoptosis, which allows access of proteases to the fluorogenic peptide substrate that was quantified by using Synergy 2 Multi-Mode Microplate Reader (BioTek, Winooski, VT). Oxygen consumption was measured with an XF extracellular flux analyzer (Seahorse Bioscience, North Billerica, MA). Cells were plated to 100% confluence on XF24 cell culture microplates. After an initial measurement, the wells were injected with St, Iono, or vehicle, and oxygen consumption was measured every 6 hr for 24 hr.
A critical event in ischemia-based cell death is the opening of the mitochondrial permeability transition pore (MPTP). However, the molecular identity of the components of the MPTP remains unknown. Here, we determined that the Bcl-2 family members Bax and Bak, which are central regulators of apoptotic cell death, are also required for mitochondrial pore-dependent necrotic cell death by facilitating outer membrane permeability of the MPTP. Loss of Bax/Bak reduced outer mitochondrial membrane permeability and conductance without altering inner membrane MPTP function, resulting in resistance to mitochondrial calcium overload and necrotic cell death. Reconstitution with mutants of Bax that cannot oligomerize and form apoptotic pores, but still enhance outer membrane permeability, permitted MPTP-dependent mitochondrial swelling and restored necrotic cell death. Our data predict that the MPTP is an inner membrane regulated process, although in the absence of Bax/Bak the outer membrane resists swelling and prevents organelle rupture to prevent cell death.
In all multicellular plants and animals, cells are continuously dying and being replaced. There are a number of different types of cell death, but two of the best studied are apoptosis and necrosis. Apoptosis, sometimes referred to as ‘cell suicide’, is a form of programmed cell death that is generally beneficial to the organism. Necrosis, however, occurs whenever cells are damaged—for example, due to a lack of oxygen—and can trigger harmful inflammation in surrounding tissue. Although the processes leading up to apoptosis and necrosis are very different, they both involve regulated changes in mitochondria—the organelles that supply cells with chemical energy.